Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 7
1 | UNITS AND
MEASUREMENT
Figure 1.1 This image might be showing any number of things. It might be a whirlpool in a tank of water or perhaps a collage
of paint and shiny beads done for art class. Without knowing the size of the object in units we all recognize, such as meters or
inches, it is difficult to know what we’re looking at. In fact, this image shows the Whirlpool Galaxy (and its companion galaxy),
which is about 60,000 light-years in diameter (about 6×1017 km across). (credit: modification of work by S. Beckwith
(STScI) Hubble Heritage Team, (STScI/AURA), ESA, NASA)
Chapter Outline
1.1The Scope and Scale of Physics
1.2Units and Standards
1.3Unit Conversion
1.4Dimensional Analysis
1.5Estimates and Fermi Calculations
1.6Significant Figures
1.7Solving Problems in Physics
Introduction
Asnotedinthefigurecaption,thechapter-openingimageisoftheWhirlpoolGalaxy,whichweexamineinthefirstsection
ofthischapter.Galaxiesareasimmenseasatomsaresmall,yetthesamelawsofphysicsdescribeboth,alongwithallthe
restofnature—anindicationoftheunderlyingunityintheuniverse.Thelawsofphysicsaresurprisinglyfew,implyingan
underlyingsimplicitytonature’sapparentcomplexity.Inthistext,youlearnaboutthelawsofphysics.Galaxiesandatoms
mayseemfarremovedfromyourdailylife,butasyoubegintoexplorethisbroad-rangingsubject,youmaysooncometo8 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
realize that physics plays a much larger role in your life than you first thought, no matter your life goals or career choice.
1.1 | The Scope and Scale of Physics
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the scope of physics.
• Calculate the order of magnitude of a quantity.
• Compare measurable length, mass, and timescales quantitatively.
• Describe the relationships among models, theories, and laws.
Physicsisdevotedtotheunderstandingofallnaturalphenomena.Inphysics,wetrytounderstandphysicalphenomenaatall
scales—fromtheworldofsubatomicparticlestotheentireuniverse.Despitethebreadthofthesubject,thevarioussubfields
ofphysicsshareacommoncore.Thesamebasictraininginphysicswillprepareyoutoworkinanyareaofphysicsandthe
relatedareasofscienceandengineering.Inthissection,weinvestigatethescopeofphysics;thescalesoflength,mass,and
timeoverwhichthelawsofphysicshavebeenshowntobeapplicable;andtheprocessbywhichscienceingeneral,and
physics in particular, operates.
The Scope of Physics
Takeanotherlookatthechapter-openingimage.TheWhirlpoolGalaxycontainsbillionsofindividualstarsaswellashuge
clouds of gas and dust. Its companion galaxy is also visible to the right. This pair of galaxies lies a staggering billion
trillion miles (1.4×1021mi) fromourowngalaxy (whichiscalled theMilky Way).Thestars andplanets that make up
theWhirlpoolGalaxymightseemtobethefurthestthingfrommostpeople’severydaylives,buttheWhirlpoolisagreat
startingpointtothinkabouttheforcesthatholdtheuniversetogether.TheforcesthatcausetheWhirlpoolGalaxytoactas
itdoesarethoughttobethesameforceswecontendwithhereonEarth,whetherweareplanningtosendarocketintospace
orsimplyplanningtoraisethewallsforanewhome.ThegravitythatcausesthestarsoftheWhirlpoolGalaxytorotateand
revolveisthoughttobethesameaswhatcauseswatertoflowoverhydroelectricdamshereonEarth.Whenyoulookup
atthestars,realizetheforcesouttherearethesameastheoneshereonEarth.Throughastudyofphysics,youmaygaina
greater understanding of the interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in this universe.
Think, now, about all the technological devices you use on a regular basis. Computers, smartphones, global positioning
systems (GPSs), MP3 players, and satellite radio might come to mind. Then, think about the most exciting modern
technologiesyouhaveheardaboutinthenews,suchastrainsthatlevitateabovetracks,“invisibilitycloaks”thatbendlight
aroundthem,andmicroscopicrobotsthatfightcancercellsinourbodies.Allthesegroundbreakingadvances,commonplace
orunbelievable,relyontheprinciplesofphysics.Asidefromplayingasignificantroleintechnology,professionalssuch
asengineers,pilots,physicians,physicaltherapists,electricians,andcomputerprogrammersapplyphysicsconceptsintheir
dailywork.Forexample,apilotmustunderstandhowwindforcesaffectaflightpath;aphysicaltherapistmustunderstand
how the muscles in the body experience forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this text, the principles of
physics are propelling new, exciting technologies, and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
Theunderlyingorderofnaturemakesscienceingeneral,andphysicsinparticular,interestingandenjoyabletostudy.For
example, what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be converted to other
forms. The law of conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is never lost) ties together such
topicsasfoodcalories,batteries,heat,light,andwatchsprings.Understandingthislawmakesiteasiertolearnaboutthe
variousformsenergytakesandhowtheyrelatetooneanother.Apparentlyunrelatedtopicsareconnectedthroughbroadly
applicable physical laws, permitting an understanding beyond just the memorization of lists of facts.
Scienceconsistsoftheoriesandlawsthatarethegeneraltruthsofnature,aswellasthebodyofknowledgetheyencompass.
Scientistsarecontinuouslytryingtoexpandthisbodyofknowledgeandtoperfecttheexpressionofthelawsthatdescribe
it. Physics, which comes from the Greek phúsis, meaning “nature,” is concerned with describing the interactions of
energy,matter,space,andtimetouncoverthefundamentalmechanismsthatunderlieeveryphenomenon.Thisconcernfor
describing the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines thescope of physics.
Physics aims to understand the world around us at the most basic level. It emphasizes the use of a small number of
quantitativelawstodothis,whichcanbeusefultootherfieldspushingtheperformanceboundariesofexistingtechnologies.
Considerasmartphone(Figure1.2).Physicsdescribeshowelectricityinteractswiththevariouscircuitsinsidethedevice.
Thisknowledgehelpsengineersselecttheappropriatematerialsandcircuitlayoutwhenbuildingasmartphone.Knowledge
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 9
ofthephysicsunderlyingthesedevicesisrequiredtoshrinktheirsizeorincreasetheirprocessingspeed.Or,thinkabouta
GPS.Physicsdescribestherelationshipbetweenthespeedofanobject,thedistanceoverwhichittravels,andthetimeit
takestotravelthatdistance.WhenyouuseaGPSinavehicle,itreliesonphysicsequationstodeterminethetraveltime
from one location to another.
Figure 1.2 The Apple iPhone is a common smartphone with a
GPS function. Physics describes the way that electricity flows
through the circuits of this device. Engineers use their
knowledge of physics to construct an iPhone with features that
consumers will enjoy. One specific feature of an iPhone is the
GPS function. A GPS uses physics equations to determine the
drive time between two locations on a map. (credit: Jane
Whitney)
Knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you understand
howmicrowaveovenswork,whymetalsshouldnotbeputintothem,andwhytheymightaffectpacemakers.Physicsallows
youtounderstandthehazardsofradiationandtoevaluatethesehazardsrationallyandmoreeasily.Physicsalsoexplainsthe
reasonwhyablackcarradiatorhelpsremoveheatinacarengine,anditexplainswhyawhiteroofhelpskeeptheinsideof
ahousecool.Similarly,theoperationofacar’signitionsystemaswellasthetransmissionofelectricalsignalsthroughout
our body’s nervous system are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of basic physics.
Physicsisakeyelementofmanyimportantdisciplinesandcontributesdirectlytoothers.Chemistry,forexample—since
it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—has close ties to atomic and molecular physics. Most branches of
engineeringareconcernedwithdesigningnewtechnologies,processes,orstructureswithintheconstraintssetbythelaws
ofphysics.Inarchitecture,physicsisattheheartofstructuralstabilityandisinvolvedintheacoustics,heating,lighting,and
coolingofbuildings.Partsofgeologyrelyheavilyonphysics,suchasradioactivedatingofrocks,earthquakeanalysis,and
heattransferwithinEarth.Somedisciplines,suchasbiophysicsandgeophysics,arehybridsofphysicsandotherdisciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the properties of
cells andtheir environments. Onthe macroscopic level, it explains the heat, work,andpower associated with the human
bodyand its various organ systems. Physics is involved in medical diagnostics, such as radiographs, magnetic resonance
imaging, and ultrasonic blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes involves physics directly; for example,
cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation. Physics also explains sensory phenomena, such as how musical instruments
make sound, how the eye detects color, and how lasers transmit information.
Itisnotnecessarytostudyallapplicationsofphysicsformally.Whatismostusefulisknowingthebasiclawsofphysics
and developing skills in the analytical methods for applying them. The study of physics also can improve your problem-
solvingskills.Furthermore,physicsretainsthemostbasicaspectsofscience,soitisusedbyallthesciences,andthestudy
of physics makes other sciences easier to understand.10 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
The Scale of Physics
Fromthediscussionsofar,itshouldbeclearthattoaccomplishyourgoalsinanyofthevariousfieldswithinthenatural
sciencesandengineering,athoroughgroundinginthelawsofphysicsisnecessary.Thereasonforthisissimplythatthe
lawsofphysicsgoverneverythingintheobservableuniverseatallmeasurablescalesoflength,mass,andtime.Now,that
is easy enough to say, but to come to grips with what it really means, we need to get a little bit quantitative. So, before
surveyingthevariousscalesthatphysicsallowsustoexplore,let’sfirstlookattheconceptof“orderofmagnitude,”which
we use to come to terms with the vast ranges of length, mass, and time that we consider in this text (Figure 1.3).
Figure 1.3 (a) Using a scanning tunneling microscope, scientists can see the individual atoms (diameters around 10–10m) that
compose this sheet of gold. (b) Tiny phytoplankton swim among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They range from a few
micrometers (1μm is 10–6m) to as much as 2 mm (1 mm is 10–3m) in length. (c) These two colliding galaxies, known as NGC
4676A (right) and NGC 4676B (left), are nicknamed “The Mice” because of the tail of gas emanating from each one. They are
located 300 million light-years from Earth in the constellation Coma Berenices. Eventually, these two galaxies will merge into
one. (credit a: modification of work by "Erwinrossen"/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by Prof. Gordon T.
Taylor, Stony Brook University; NOAA Corps Collections; credit c: modification of work by NASA, H. Ford (JHU), G.
Illingworth (UCSC/LO), M. Clampin (STScI), G. Hartig (STScI), the ACS Science Team, and ESA)
Order of magnitude
Theorderofmagnitudeofanumberisthepowerof10thatmostcloselyapproximatesit.Thus,theorderofmagnitude
refers to the scale (or size) of a value. Each power of 10 represents a different order of magnitude. For example,
101, 102, 103 , andsoforth,arealldifferentordersofmagnitude,asare 100 =1, 10−1, 10−2, and 10−3 . Tofindthe
orderofmagnitudeofanumber,takethebase-10logarithmofthenumberandroundittothenearestinteger,thentheorder
ofmagnitudeofthenumberissimplytheresultingpowerof10.Forexample,theorderofmagnitudeof800is103because
log 800≈2.903, which rounds to 3. Similarly, the order of magnitude of 450 is 103 because log 450≈2.653,
10 10
whichroundsto3aswell.Thus,wesaythenumbers800and450areofthesameorderofmagnitude:103.However,the
order of magnitude of 250 is 102because log 250≈2.397, which rounds to 2.
10
Anequivalentbutquickerwaytofindtheorderofmagnitudeofanumberisfirsttowriteitinscientificnotationandthen
checktoseewhetherthefirstfactorisgreaterthanorlessthan 10=100.5 ≈3. Theideaisthat 10=100.5 ishalfway
between 1=100 and 10=101 onalogbase-10scale.Thus,ifthefirstfactorislessthan 10, thenwerounditdown
to1andtheorderofmagnitudeissimplywhateverpowerof10isrequiredtowritethenumberinscientificnotation.On
theotherhand,ifthefirstfactorisgreaterthan 10, thenwerounditupto10andtheorderofmagnitudeisonepowerof
10higherthanthepowerneededtowritethenumberinscientificnotation.Forexample,thenumber800canbewrittenin
scientificnotationas 8×102. Because8isbiggerthan 10≈3, wesaytheorderofmagnitudeof800is 102+1 =103 .
Thenumber450canbewrittenas 4.5×102, soitsorderofmagnitudeisalso103because4.5isgreaterthan3.However,
250 written in scientific notation is 2.5×102 and 2.5 is less than 3, so its order of magnitude is 102.
Theorderofmagnitudeofanumberisdesignedtobeaballparkestimateforthescale(orsize)ofitsvalue.Itissimplya
wayofroundingnumbersconsistentlytothenearestpowerof10.Thismakesdoingroughmentalmathwithverybigand
verysmallnumberseasier.Forexample,thediameterofahydrogenatomisontheorderof10−10m,whereasthediameter
of the Sun is on the order of 109 m, so it would take roughly 109 /10−10 =1019 hydrogen atoms to stretch across the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 11
diameteroftheSun.Thisismucheasiertodoinyourheadthanusingthemoreprecisevaluesof 1.06×10−10 m fora
hydrogenatomdiameterand 1.39×109 m fortheSun’sdiameter,tofindthatitwouldtake 1.31×1019 hydrogenatoms
tostretchacrosstheSun’sdiameter.Inadditiontobeingeasier,theroughestimateisalsonearlyasinformativeastheprecise
calculation.
Known ranges of length, mass, and time
Thevastnessoftheuniverseandthebreadthoverwhichphysicsappliesareillustratedbythewiderangeofexamplesof
known lengths, masses, and times (given as orders of magnitude) in Figure 1.4. Examining this table will give you a
feelingfortherangeofpossibletopicsinphysicsandnumericalvalues.Agoodwaytoappreciatethevastnessoftheranges
of values inFigure 1.4is to try to answer some simple comparative questions, such as the following:
• How many hydrogen atoms does it take to stretch across the diameter of the Sun?
(Answer: 109m/10–10m = 1019hydrogen atoms)
• How many protons are there in a bacterium?
(Answer: 10–15kg/10–27kg = 1012protons)
• How many floating-point operations can a supercomputer do in 1 day?
(Answer: 105s/10–17s = 1022floating-point operations)
InstudyingFigure 1.4,takesometimetocomeupwithsimilarquestionsthatinterestyouandthentryansweringthem.
Doing this can breathe some life into almost any table of numbers.12 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
Figure 1.4 This table shows the orders of magnitude of length, mass, and time.
Visitthissite(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21scaleuniv)toexploreinteractivelythevastrangeoflength
scalesinouruniverse.Scrolldownandupthescaletoviewhundredsoforganismsandobjects,andclickonthe
individual objects to learn more about each one.
Building Models
How did we come to know the laws governing natural phenomena? What we refer to as the laws of nature are concise
descriptionsoftheuniversearoundus.Theyarehumanstatementsoftheunderlyinglawsorrulesthatallnaturalprocesses
follow.Suchlawsareintrinsictotheuniverse;humansdidnotcreatethemandcannotchangethem.Wecanonlydiscover
andunderstand them. Their discovery is averyhuman endeavor,with all the elements ofmystery,imagination, struggle,
triumph,anddisappointment inherentinanycreative effort(Figure 1.5).Thecornerstoneofdiscoveringnaturallawsis
observation; scientists must describe the universe as it is, not as we imagine it to be.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 13
Figure 1.5 (a) EnricoFermi(1901–1954) was born in Italy. On accepting the Nobel Prize in
Stockholm in 1938 for his work on artificial radioactivity produced by neutrons, he took his
family to America rather than return home to the government in power at the time. He became an
American citizen and was a leading participant in the Manhattan Project. (b) MarieCurie
(1867–1934) sacrificed monetary assets to help finance her early research and damaged her
physical well-being with radiation exposure. She is the only person to win Nobel prizes in both
physics and chemistry. One of her daughters also won a Nobel Prize. (credit a: modification of
work by United States Department of Energy)
Amodel is a representation ofsomething that is often too difficult (orimpossible) to display directly.Although a model
isjustifiedbyexperimentaltests,itisonlyaccurateindescribingcertainaspectsofaphysicalsystem.Anexampleisthe
Bohrmodelofsingle-electronatoms,inwhichtheelectronispicturedasorbitingthenucleus,analogoustothewayplanets
orbit the Sun (Figure 1.6). We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the mental image helps explain some of the
observations we can make, such as the emission of light from hot gases (atomic spectra). However, other observations
show that the picture in the Bohr model is not really what atoms look like. The model is “wrong,” but is still useful for
somepurposes.Physicistsusemodelsforavarietyofpurposes.Forexample,modelscanhelpphysicistsanalyzeascenario
andperformacalculationormodelscanbeusedtorepresentasituationintheformofacomputersimulation.Ultimately,
however,theresultsofthesecalculationsandsimulationsneedtobedouble-checkedbyothermeans—namely,observation
and experimentation.
Figure 1.6 What is a model? The Bohr model of a single-
electron atom shows the electron orbiting the nucleus in one of
several possible circular orbits. Like all models, it captures
some, but not all, aspects of the physical system.14 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
The word theory means something different to scientists than what is often meant when the word is used in everyday
conversation. In particular, to a scientist a theory is not the same as a “guess” or an “idea” or even a “hypothesis.” The
phrase“it’sjustatheory”seemsmeaninglessandsillytoscientistsbecausescienceisfoundedonthenotionoftheories.To
ascientist,atheoryisatestableexplanationforpatternsinnaturesupportedbyscientific evidenceandverifiedmultiple
timesbyvariousgroupsofresearchers.Sometheoriesincludemodelstohelpvisualizephenomenawhereasothersdonot.
Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects
directlywithourownsenses.Thekinetictheoryofgases,ontheotherhand,isamodelinwhichagasisviewedasbeing
composedofatomsandmolecules.Atomsandmoleculesaretoosmalltobeobserveddirectlywithoursenses—thus,we
picturethemmentallytounderstandwhattheinstrumentstellusaboutthebehaviorofgases.Althoughmodelsaremeant
onlytodescribecertainaspectsofaphysicalsystemaccurately,atheoryshoulddescribeallaspectsofanysystemthatfalls
withinitsdomainofapplicability.Inparticular,anyexperimentallytestableimplicationofatheoryshouldbeverified.Ifan
experimentevershowsanimplicationofatheorytobefalse,thenthetheoryiseitherthrownoutormodifiedsuitably(for
example, by limiting its domain of applicability).
A law uses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature supported by scientific evidence and repeated
experiments. Often, alaw can beexpressed inthe formofasingle mathematical equation. Laws andtheories are similar
in that they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are supported by scientific evidence.
However, the designation law is usually reserved for a concise and very general statement that describes phenomena in
nature,suchasthelawthatenergyisconservedduringanyprocess,orNewton’ssecondlawofmotion,whichrelatesforce
(F), mass (m), and acceleration (a) by the simple equation F =ma. A theory, in contrast, is a less concise statement of
observedbehavior.Forexample,thetheoryofevolutionandthetheoryofrelativitycannotbeexpressedconciselyenoughto
beconsideredlaws.Thebiggestdifferencebetweenalawandatheoryisthatatheoryismuchmorecomplexanddynamic.
Alawdescribesasingleactionwhereasatheoryexplainsanentiregroupofrelatedphenomena.Lessbroadlyapplicable
statementsareusuallycalledprinciples(suchasPascal’sprinciple,whichisapplicableonlyinfluids),butthedistinction
between laws and principles often is not made carefully.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimes imply the existence of objects or phenomena that are as yet
unobserved.Thesepredictions areremarkable triumphsandtributestothepowerofscience. Itistheunderlyingorderin
theuniversethatenablesscientiststomakesuchspectacularpredictions.However,ifexperimentationdoesnotverifyour
predictions, then the theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or convenient it is. Laws can never be known with
absolute certainty because it is impossible to perform every imaginable experiment to confirm a law for every possible
scenario. Physicists operate under the assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid until a counterexample is
observed.Ifagood-quality,verifiableexperimentcontradictsawell-establishedlawortheory,thenthelawortheorymust
be modified or overthrown completely.
Thestudyofscienceingeneral,andphysicsinparticular,isanadventuremuchliketheexplorationofanunchartedocean.
Discoveries are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; and the beauty of the physical universe is made more
sublime for the insights gained.
1.2 | Units and Standards
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how SI base units are defined.
• Describe how derived units are created from base units.
• Express quantities given in SI units using metric prefixes.
Aswesawpreviously,therangeofobjectsandphenomenastudiedinphysicsisimmense.Fromtheincrediblyshortlifetime
ofanucleustotheageofEarth,fromthetinysizesofsubnuclearparticlestothevastdistancetotheedgesoftheknown
universe,fromtheforceexertedbyajumpingfleatotheforcebetweenEarthandtheSun,thereareenoughfactorsof10
to challenge the imagination of even the most experienced scientist. Giving numerical values for physical quantities and
equationsforphysicalprinciplesallowsustounderstandnaturemuchmoredeeplythanqualitativedescriptionsalone.To
comprehendthesevastranges,wemustalsohaveacceptedunitsinwhichtoexpressthem.Weshallfindthateveninthe
potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilograms, and seconds, a profound simplicity of nature appears: all physical
quantities can be expressed as combinations of only seven base physical quantities.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 15
We define a physical quantity either by specifying how it is measured or by stating how it is calculated from other
measurements.Forexample,wemightdefinedistanceandtimebyspecifyingmethodsformeasuringthem,suchasusing
a meter stick and a stopwatch. Then, we could define average speed by stating that it is calculated as the total distance
traveled divided by time of travel.
Measurementsofphysicalquantitiesareexpressedintermsofunits,whicharestandardizedvalues.Forexample,thelength
ofarace,whichisaphysicalquantity,canbeexpressedinunitsofmeters(forsprinters)orkilometers(fordistancerunners).
Without standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and compare measured values in a
meaningful way (Figure 1.7).
Figure 1.7 Distances given in unknown units are maddeningly
useless.
Two major systems of units are used in the world: SI units (for the French Système International d’Unités), also known
asthemetricsystem,andEnglishunits(alsoknownasthecustomaryorimperialsystem).Englishunitswerehistorically
usedinnationsonceruledbytheBritishEmpireandarestillwidelyusedintheUnitedStates.Englishunitsmayalsobe
referredtoasthefoot–pound–second(fps)system,asopposedtothecentimeter–gram–second(cgs)system.Youmayalso
encounterthetermSAEunits,namedaftertheSocietyofAutomotiveEngineers.Productssuchasfastenersandautomotive
tools(forexample,wrenches)thataremeasuredininchesratherthanmetricunitsarereferredtoasSAEfastenersorSAE
wrenches.
Virtuallyeveryothercountryintheworld(excepttheUnitedStates)nowusesSIunitsasthestandard.Themetricsystem
is also the standard system agreed on by scientists and mathematicians.
SI Units: Base and Derived Units
Inanysystemofunits,theunitsforsomephysicalquantitiesmustbedefinedthroughameasurement process.Theseare
called the base quantities for that system and their units are the system’s base units. All other physical quantities can
then be expressed as algebraic combinations of the base quantities. Each of these physical quantities is then known as a
derivedquantityandeachunitiscalledaderivedunit.Thechoiceofbasequantitiesissomewhatarbitrary,aslongasthey
areindependentofeachotherandallotherquantitiescanbederivedfromthem.Typically,thegoalistochoosephysical
quantitiesthatcanbemeasuredaccuratelytoahighprecisionasthebasequantities.Thereasonforthisissimple.Sincethe
derivedunitscanbeexpressedasalgebraiccombinationsofthebaseunits,theycanonlybeasaccurateandpreciseasthe
base units from which they are derived.
Based on such considerations, the International Standards Organization recommends using seven base quantities, which
formtheInternationalSystemofQuantities(ISQ).ThesearethebasequantitiesusedtodefinetheSIbaseunits.Table1.1
lists these seven ISQ base quantities and the corresponding SI base units.
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Length meter (m)
Mass kilogram (kg)
Time second (s)
Table 1.1ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units16 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
ISQ Base Quantity SI Base Unit
Electrical current ampere (A)
Thermodynamic temperature kelvin (K)
Amount of substance mole (mol)
Luminous intensity candela (cd)
Table 1.1ISQ Base Quantities and Their SI Units
YouareprobablyalreadyfamiliarwithsomederivedquantitiesthatcanbeformedfromthebasequantitiesinTable 1.1.
For example, the geometric concept of area is always calculated as the product of two lengths. Thus, area is a derived
quantitythatcanbeexpressedintermsofSIbaseunitsusingsquaremeters (m×m=m2). Similarly,volumeisaderived
quantity that can be expressed in cubic meters (m3 ). Speed is length per time; so in terms of SI base units, we could
measure it in meters per second (m/s). Volume mass density (or just density) is mass per volume, which is expressed in
terms of SI base units such as kilograms per cubic meter (kg/m3). Angles can also be thought of as derived quantities
becausetheycanbedefinedastheratioofthearclengthsubtendedbytworadiiofacircletotheradiusofthecircle.This
ishowtheradianisdefined.Dependingonyourbackgroundandinterests,youmaybeabletocomeupwithotherderived
quantities,suchasthemassflowrate(kg/s)orvolumeflowrate(m3/s)ofafluid,electriccharge (A·s), massfluxdensity
[kg/(m2·s)], andsoon.Wewillseemanymoreexamplesthroughoutthistext.Fornow,thepointisthateveryphysical
quantitycanbederivedfromthesevenbasequantitiesinTable1.1,andtheunitsofeveryphysicalquantitycanbederived
from the seven SI base units.
Forthemostpart,weuseSIunitsinthistext.Non-SIunitsareusedinafewapplicationsinwhichtheyareinverycommon
use,suchasthemeasurementoftemperatureindegreesCelsius (°C), themeasurementoffluidvolumeinliters(L),and
themeasurementofenergiesofelementaryparticlesinelectron-volts(eV).Whenevernon-SIunitsarediscussed,theyare
tied to SI units through conversions. For example, 1 L is 10−3 m3 .
CheckoutacomprehensivesourceofinformationonSIunits(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21SIUnits)at
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty.
Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
Theinitialchaptersinthistextbookareconcernedwithmechanics,fluids,andwaves.Inthesesubjectsallpertinentphysical
quantitiescanbeexpressedintermsofthebaseunitsoflength,mass,andtime.Therefore,wenowturntoadiscussionof
these three base units, leaving discussion of the others until they are needed later.
The second
TheSIunitfortime,thesecond(abbreviateds),hasalonghistory.Formanyyearsitwasdefinedas1/86,400ofamean
solar day. More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in terms of a
nonvaryingorconstantphysicalphenomenon(becausethesolardayisgettinglongerasaresultoftheverygradualslowing
ofEarth’srotation).Cesiumatomscanbemadetovibrateinaverysteadyway,andthesevibrationscanbereadilyobserved
andcounted.In1967,thesecondwasredefinedasthetimerequiredfor9,192,631,770ofthesevibrationstooccur(Figure
1.8). Note that this may seem like more precision than you would ever need, but it isn’t—GPSs rely on the precision of
atomicclockstobeabletogiveyouturn-by-turndirectionsonthesurfaceofEarth,farfromthesatellitesbroadcastingtheir
location.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 17
Figure 1.8 An atomic clock such as this one uses the
vibrations of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of better
than a microsecond per year. The fundamental unit of time, the
second, is based on such clocks. This image looks down from
the top of an atomic fountain nearly 30 feet tall. (credit: Steve
Jurvetson)
The meter
TheSIunitforlengthisthemeter(abbreviatedm);itsdefinitionhasalsochangedovertimetobecomemoreprecise.The
meterwasfirstdefinedin1791as1/10,000,000ofthedistancefromtheequatortotheNorthPole.Thismeasurementwas
improved in 1889byredefining the meter to be the distance between two engraved lines ona platinum–iridium bar now
keptnearParis.By1960,ithadbecomepossibletodefinethemeterevenmoreaccuratelyintermsofthewavelengthof
light,soitwasagainredefinedas1,650,763.73wavelengthsoforangelightemittedbykryptonatoms.In1983,themeter
wasgivenitscurrentdefinition(inpartforgreateraccuracy)asthedistancelighttravelsinavacuumin1/299,792,458ofa
second(Figure1.9).Thischangecameafterknowingthespeedoflighttobeexactly299,792,458m/s.Thelengthofthe
meter will change if the speed of light is someday measured with greater accuracy.
Figure 1.9 The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Distance
traveled is speed multiplied by time.
The kilogram
The SI unit for mass is the kilogram (abbreviated kg); it is defined to be the mass of a platinum–iridium cylinder
kept with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. Exact replicas of the
standardkilogramarealsokeptattheU.S.NationalInstituteofStandardsandTechnology(NIST),locatedinGaithersburg,
Maryland,outsideofWashington,DC,andatotherlocationsaroundtheworld.ScientistsatNISTarecurrentlyinvestigating
twocomplementarymethodsofredefiningthekilogram(seeFigure 1.10).Thedeterminationofallothermassescanbe
traced ultimately to a comparison with the standard mass.
ThereiscurrentlyanefforttoredefinetheSIunitofmassintermsofmorefundamentalprocessesby2018.You
can explore the history of mass standards and the contenders in the quest to devise a new one at the website
(https://www.nist.gov/pml/productsservices/redefining-kilogram) of the Physical Measurement
Laboratory.18 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
Figure 1.10 Redefining the SI unit of mass. Complementary methods are being investigated for use in an upcoming
redefinition of the SI unit of mass. (a) The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology’s watt balance is a machine that
balances the weight of a test mass against the current and voltage (the “watt”) produced by a strong system of magnets. (b) The
International Avogadro Project is working to redefine the kilogram based on the dimensions, mass, and other known properties of
a silicon sphere. (credit a and credit b: modification of work by National Institute of Standards and Technology)
Metric Prefixes
SIunitsarepartofthemetricsystem,whichisconvenientforscientificandengineeringcalculationsbecausetheunitsare
categorizedbyfactorsof10.Table1.2liststhemetricprefixesandsymbolsusedtodenotevariousfactorsof10inSIunits.
Forexample,acentimeterisone-hundredthofameter(insymbols,1cm=10–2m)andakilometerisathousandmeters(1
km=103m).Similarly,amegagramisamilliongrams(1Mg=106g),ananosecondisabillionthofasecond(1ns=10–9
s), and a terameter is a trillion meters (1 Tm = 1012m).
Prefix Symbol Meaning Prefix Symbol Meaning
yotta- Y 1024 yocto- y 10–24
zetta- Z 1021 zepto- z 10–21
exa- E 1018 atto- a 10–18
peta- P 1015 femto- f 10–15
tera- T 1012 pico- p 10–12
giga- G 109 nano- n 10–9
mega- M 106 micro- µ 10–6
kilo- k 103 milli- m 10–3
hecto- h 102 centi- c 10–2
deka- da 101 deci- d 10–1
Table 1.2Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and Their Symbols
Theonlyrulewhenusingmetricprefixesisthatyoucannot“doublethemup.”Forexample,ifyouhavemeasurementsin
petameters(1Pm=1015m),itisnotpropertotalkaboutmegagigameters,although 106 ×109 =1015 . Inpractice,the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 19
onlytimethisbecomesabitconfusingiswhendiscussingmasses.Aswehaveseen,thebaseSIunitofmassisthekilogram
(kg),butmetricprefixesneedtobeappliedtothegram(g),becausewearenotallowedto“double-up”prefixes.Thus,a
thousand kilograms (103kg) is written as a megagram (1 Mg) since
3 3 3 6
10 kg=10 ×10 g=10 g=1Mg.
Incidentally, 103 kg is also called a metric ton, abbreviated t. This is one of the units outside the SI system considered
acceptable for use with SI units.
Asweseeinthenextsection,metricsystemshavetheadvantagethatconversionsofunitsinvolveonlypowersof10.There
are100cmin1m,1000min1km,andsoon.Innonmetricsystems,suchastheEnglishsystemofunits,therelationships
are not as simple—there are 12 in. in 1 ft, 5280 ft in 1 mi, and so on.
Another advantage of metric systems is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply by
scalingitwithanappropriatemetricprefix.Theprefixischosenbytheorderofmagnitudeofphysicalquantitiescommonly
foundinthetaskathand.Forexample,distancesinmetersaresuitableinconstruction,whereasdistancesinkilometersare
appropriateforairtravel,andnanometersareconvenientinopticaldesign.Withthemetricsystemthereisnoneedtoinvent
new units for particular applications. Instead, we rescale the units with which we are already familiar.
Example 1.1
Using Metric Prefixes
Restatethemass 1.93×1013 kg usingametricprefixsuchthattheresultingnumericalvalueisbiggerthanone
but less than 1000.
Strategy
Since we are not allowed to “double-up” prefixes, we first need to restate the mass in grams by replacing the
prefixsymbolkwithafactorof103(seeTable1.2).Then,weshouldseewhichtwoprefixesinTable1.2are
closesttotheresultingpowerof10whenthenumberiswritteninscientificnotation.Weusewhicheverofthese
two prefixes gives us a number between one and 1000.
Solution
Replacing the k in kilogram with a factor of 103, we find that
13 13 3 16
1.93×10 kg=1.93×10 ×10 g=1.93×10 g.
FromTable1.2,weseethat1016isbetween“peta-”(1015)and“exa-”(1018).Ifweusethe“peta-”prefix,then
wefindthat 1.93×1016 g=1.93×101Pg, since 16=1+15. Alternatively,ifweusethe“exa-”prefixwe
findthat 1.93×1016 g=1.93×10−2Eg, since 16=−2+18. Becausetheproblemasksforthenumerical
value between one and 1000, we use the “peta-” prefix and the answer is 19.3 Pg.
Significance
Itiseasytomakesillyarithmeticerrorswhenswitchingfromoneprefixtoanother,soitisalwaysagoodideato
checkthatourfinalanswermatchesthenumberwestartedwith.Aneasywaytodothisistoputbothnumbersin
scientificnotationandcountpowersof10,includingtheoneshiddeninprefixes.Ifwedidnotmakeamistake,
the powers of 10 should match up. In this problem, we started with 1.93×1013 kg, so we have 13 + 3 = 16
powersof10.Ourfinalanswerinscientificnotationis 1.93×101 Pg,sowehave1+15=16powersof10.So,
everything checks out.
Ifthismassarosefromacalculation,wewouldalsowanttochecktodeterminewhetheramassthislargemakes
any sense in the context of the problem. For this,Figure 1.4might be helpful.
1.1 CheckYourUnderstandingRestate 4.79×105 kg usingametricprefixsuchthattheresultingnumber
is bigger than one but less than 1000.20 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
1.3 | Unit Conversion
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use conversion factors to express the value of a given quantity in different units.
It is often necessary to convert from one unit to another. For example, if you are reading a European cookbook, some
quantities may be expressed in units of liters and you need to convert them to cups. Or perhaps you are reading walking
directionsfromonelocationtoanotherandyouareinterestedinhowmanymilesyouwillbewalking.Inthiscase,youmay
need to convert units of feet or meters to miles.
Let’sconsiderasimpleexampleofhowtoconvertunits.Supposewewanttoconvert80mtokilometers.Thefirstthingto
doistolisttheunitsyouhaveandtheunitstowhichyouwanttoconvert.Inthiscase,wehaveunitsinmetersandwewant
toconverttokilometers.Next,weneedtodetermineaconversionfactorrelatingmeterstokilometers.Aconversionfactor
isaratiothatexpresseshowmanyofoneunitareequaltoanotherunit.Forexample,thereare12in.in1ft,1609min1
mi,100cmin1m,60sin1min,andsoon.RefertoAppendixBforamorecompletelistofconversionfactors.Inthis
case,weknowthatthereare1000min1km.Nowwecansetupourunitconversion.Wewritetheunitswehaveandthen
multiply them by the conversion factor so the units cancel out, as shown:
1km
80m× =0.080km.
1000m
Note that the unwanted meter unit cancels, leaving only the desired kilometer unit. You can use this method to convert
betweenanytypeofunit.Now,theconversionof80mtokilometersissimplytheuseofametricprefix,aswesawinthe
preceding section, so we can get the same answer just as easily by noting that
80m=8.0×101m=8.0×10−2km=0.080km,
since“kilo-”means103(seeTable 1.2)and 1=−2+3. However,usingconversionfactorsishandywhenconverting
between units that are not metric or when converting between derived units, as the following examples illustrate.
Example 1.2
Converting Nonmetric Units to Metric
Thedistancefromtheuniversitytohomeis10mianditusuallytakes20mintodrivethisdistance.Calculatethe
average speed in meters per second (m/s). (Note:Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given units, then we can get the average speed into the desired
unitsbypickingthecorrectconversionfactorsandmultiplyingbythem.Thecorrectconversionfactorsarethose
thatcanceltheunwantedunitsandleavethedesiredunitsintheirplace.Inthiscase,wewanttoconvertmilesto
meters,soweneedtoknowthefactthatthereare1609min1mi.Wealsowanttoconvertminutestoseconds,
so we use the conversion of 60 s in 1 min.
Solution
1. Calculateaveragespeed.Averagespeedisdistancetraveleddividedbytimeoftravel.(Takethisdefinition
asagivenfornow.Averagespeedandothermotionconceptsarecoveredinlaterchapters.)Inequation
form,
Distance
Average speed = .
Time
2. Substitute the given values for distance and time:
10mi mi
Average speed = =0.50 .
20min min
3. Convertmilesperminutetometerspersecondbymultiplyingbytheconversionfactorthatcancelsmiles
and leave meters, and also by the conversion factor that cancels minutes and leave seconds:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 21
mile 1609m 1min (0.50)(1609)
0.50 × × = m/s=13m/s.
min 1mile 60s 60
Significance
Check the answer in the following ways:
1. Besuretheunitsintheunitconversioncancelcorrectly.Iftheunitconversionfactorwaswrittenupside
down, the units do not cancel correctly in the equation. We see the “miles” in the numerator in 0.50
mi/min cancels the “mile” in the denominator in the first conversion factor. Also, the “min” in the
denominator in 0.50 mi/min cancels the “min” in the numerator in the second conversion factor.
2. Checkthattheunitsofthefinalanswerarethedesiredunits.Theproblemaskedustosolveforaverage
speedinunitsofmeterspersecondand,afterthecancellations,theonlyunitsleftareameter(m)inthe
numerator and a second (s) in the denominator, so we have indeed obtained these units.
1.2 CheckYourUnderstandingLighttravelsabout9Pminayear.Giventhatayearisabout 3×107 s,
what is the speed of light in meters per second?
Example 1.3
Converting between Metric Units
The density of iron is 7.86g/cm3 under standard conditions. Convert this to kg/m3.
Strategy
Weneedtoconvertgramstokilogramsandcubiccentimeterstocubicmeters.Theconversionfactorsweneedare
1kg=103 g and 1cm=10−2m. However,wearedealingwithcubiccentimeters (cm3 =cm×cm×cm),
sowehavetousethesecondconversionfactorthreetimes(thatis,weneedtocubeit).Theideaisstilltomultiply
bytheconversionfactorsinsuchawaythattheycanceltheunitswewanttogetridofandintroducetheunitswe
want to keep.
Solution
3
g kg ⎛ cm ⎞ 7.86 3 3 3
7.86 × × = kg/m =7.86×10 kg/m
cm3 103
g
⎝ 10−2m⎠ (103 )(10−6
)
Significance
Remember, it’s always important to check the answer.
1. Besuretocanceltheunitsintheunitconversioncorrectly.Weseethatthegram(“g”)inthenumerator
in7.86g/cm3cancelsthe“g”inthedenominatorinthefirstconversionfactor.Also,thethreefactorsof
“cm”inthedenominatorin7.86g/cm3cancelwiththethreefactorsof“cm”inthenumeratorthatweget
by cubing the second conversion factor.
2. Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked for us to convert to
kilogramspercubicmeter.Afterthecancellationsjustdescribed,weseetheonlyunitswehaveleftare
“kg”inthenumeratorandthreefactorsof“m”inthedenominator(thatis,onefactorof“m”cubed,or
“m3”). Therefore, the units on the final answer are correct.
1.3 CheckYourUnderstandingWeknowfromFigure1.4thatthediameterofEarthisontheorderof107
m,sotheorderofmagnitudeofitssurfaceareais1014m2.Whatisthatinsquarekilometers(thatis,km2)?(Try
doing this both by converting 107 m to km and then squaring it and then by converting 1014 m2 directly to
square kilometers. You should get the same answer both ways.)
Unitconversionsmaynotseemveryinteresting,butnotdoingthemcanbecostly.Onefamousexampleofthissituationwas22 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
seenwiththeMarsClimateOrbiter.ThisprobewaslaunchedbyNASAonDecember11,1998.OnSeptember23,1999,
whileattemptingtoguidetheprobeintoitsplannedorbitaroundMars,NASAlostcontactwithit.Subsequentinvestigations
showedapieceofsoftwarecalledSM_FORCES(or“smallforces”)wasrecordingthrusterperformancedataintheEnglish
unitsofpound-seconds(lb-s).However,otherpiecesofsoftwarethatusedthesevaluesforcoursecorrectionsexpectedthem
toberecordedintheSIunitsofnewton-seconds(N-s),asdictatedinthesoftwareinterfaceprotocols.Thiserrorcausedthe
probetofollowaverydifferenttrajectoryfromwhatNASAthoughtitwasfollowing,whichmostlikelycausedtheprobe
eithertoburnupintheMartianatmosphereortoshootoutintospace.Thisfailuretopayattentiontounitconversionscost
hundreds of millions of dollars, not to mention all the time invested by the scientists and engineers who worked on the
project.
1.4 Check Your Understanding Given that 1 lb (pound) is 4.45 N, were the numbers being output by
SM_FORCES too big or too small?
1.4 | Dimensional Analysis
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Find the dimensions of a mathematical expression involving physical quantities.
• Determine whether an equation involving physical quantities is dimensionally consistent.
Thedimensionofanyphysicalquantityexpressesitsdependenceonthebasequantitiesasaproductofsymbols(orpowers
ofsymbols)representingthebasequantities.Table1.3liststhebasequantitiesandthesymbolsusedfortheirdimension.
For example, a measurement of length is said to have dimension L or L1, a measurement of mass has dimension M or
M1, and a measurement of time has dimension T or T1. Like units, dimensions obey the rules of algebra. Thus, area is
the product of two lengths and so has dimension L2, or length squared. Similarly, volume is the product of three lengths
andhasdimensionL3,orlengthcubed.Speedhasdimensionlengthovertime,L/TorLT–1.Volumetricmassdensityhas
dimensionM/L3orML–3,ormassoverlengthcubed.Ingeneral,thedimensionofanyphysicalquantitycanbewrittenas
La Mb Tc Id Θe Nf Jg forsomepowers a, b, c, d, e, f, andg.Wecanwritethedimensionsofalengthinthisformwith
a=1 andtheremainingsixpowersallsetequaltozero: L1=L1M0 T0 I0 Θ0 N0 J0 . Anyquantitywithadimensionthat
canbewrittensothatallsevenpowersarezero(thatis,itsdimensionis L0 M0 T0 I0 Θ0 N0 J0)iscalleddimensionless
(or sometimes “of dimension 1,” because anything raised to the zero power is one). Physicists often call dimensionless
quantitiespure numbers.
Base Quantity Symbol for Dimension
Length L
Mass M
Time T
Current I
Thermodynamic temperature Θ
Amount of substance N
Luminous intensity J
Table 1.3Base Quantities and Their Dimensions
Physicistsoftenusesquarebracketsaroundthesymbolforaphysicalquantitytorepresentthedimensionsofthatquantity.
For example, if r is the radius of a cylinder and h is its height, then we write [r]=L and [h]=L to indicate the
dimensionsoftheradiusandheightareboththoseoflength,orL.Similarly,ifweusethesymbol A forthesurfaceareaof
acylinderand V foritsvolume,then[A]=L2and[V]=L3.Ifweusethesymbol m forthemassofthecylinderand ρ
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 23
for the density of the material from which the cylinder is made, then [m]=M and [ρ]=ML−3 .
Theimportanceoftheconceptofdimensionarisesfromthefactthatanymathematicalequationrelatingphysicalquantities
must bedimensionally consistent, which means the equation must obey the following rules:
• Everyterminanexpressionmusthavethesamedimensions;itdoesnotmakesensetoaddorsubtractquantitiesof
differingdimension(thinkoftheoldsaying:“Youcan’taddapplesandoranges”).Inparticular,theexpressionson
each side of the equality in an equation must have the same dimensions.
• The arguments of any of the standard mathematical functions such as trigonometric functions (such as sine and
cosine), logarithms, or exponential functions that appear in the equation must be dimensionless. These functions
require pure numbers as inputs and give pure numbers as outputs.
Ifeitheroftheserulesisviolated,anequationisnotdimensionally consistent andcannotpossiblybeacorrectstatement
ofphysicallaw.Thissimplefactcanbeusedtocheckfortyposoralgebramistakes,tohelprememberthevariouslawsof
physics,andeventosuggesttheformthatnewlawsofphysicsmighttake.Thislastuseofdimensionsisbeyondthescope
of this text, but is something you will undoubtedly learn later in your academic career.
Example 1.4
Using Dimensions to Remember an Equation
Suppose we need the formula for the area of a circle for some computation. Like many people who learned
geometry too long ago to recall with any certainty, two expressions may pop into our mind when we think of
circles: πr2 and 2πr. Oneexpressionisthecircumferenceofacircleofradiusrandtheotherisitsarea.But
which is which?
Strategy
Onenaturalstrategyistolookitup,butthiscouldtaketimetofindinformationfromareputablesource.Besides,
evenifwethinkthesourceisreputable,weshouldn’ttrusteverythingweread.Itisnicetohaveawaytodouble-
checkjustbythinkingaboutit.Also,wemightbeinasituationinwhichwecannotlookthingsup(suchasduring
atest).Thus,thestrategyistofindthedimensionsofbothexpressionsbymakinguseofthefactthatdimensions
followtherulesofalgebra.Ifeitherexpressiondoesnothavethesamedimensionsasarea,thenitcannotpossibly
be the correct equation for the area of a circle.
Solution
We know the dimension of area is L2. Now, the dimension of the expression πr2 is
[πr2]=[π]·[r]2=1·L2=L2,
sincetheconstant π isapurenumberandtheradius r isalength.Therefore, πr2 hasthedimensionofarea.
Similarly, the dimension of the expression 2πr is
[2πr]=[2]·[π]·[r]=1·1·L=L,
since the constants 2 and π are both dimensionless and the radius r is a length. We see that 2πr has the
dimension of length, which means it cannot possibly be an area.
Weruleout 2πr becauseitisnotdimensionallyconsistentwithbeinganarea.Weseethat πr2 isdimensionally
consistent with being an area, so if we have to choose between these two expressions, πr2 is the one to choose.
Significance
Thismayseemlikekindofasillyexample,buttheideasareverygeneral.Aslongasweknowthedimensions
of the individual physical quantities that appear in an equation, we can check to see whether the equation is
dimensionally consistent. On the other hand, knowing that true equations are dimensionally consistent, we can
matchexpressionsfromourimperfectmemoriestothequantitiesforwhichtheymightbeexpressions.Doingthis
willnothelpusrememberdimensionlessfactorsthatappearintheequations(forexample,ifyouhadaccidentally
conflated the two expressions from the example into 2πr2, then dimensional analysis is no help), but it does
help us remember the correct basic form of equations.24 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
1.5 Check Your Understanding Suppose we want the formula for the volume of a sphere. The two
expressions commonly mentioned in elementary discussions of spheres are 4πr2 and 4πr3 /3. One is the
volume of a sphere of radiusrand the other is its surface area. Which one is the volume?
Example 1.5
Checking Equations for Dimensional Consistency
Consider the physical quantities s, v, a, and t with dimensions [s]=L, [v]=LT−1, [a]=LT−2,
and [t]=T. Determine whether each of the following equations is dimensionally consistent: (a)
s=vt+0.5at2; (b) s=vt2+0.5at; and (c) v=sin(at2/s).
Strategy
Bythedefinitionofdimensionalconsistency,weneedtocheckthateachterminagivenequationhasthesame
dimensionsastheothertermsinthatequationandthattheargumentsofanystandardmathematicalfunctionsare
dimensionless.
Solution
a. Therearenotrigonometric,logarithmic,orexponentialfunctionstoworryaboutinthisequation,sowe
needonlylookatthedimensionsofeachtermappearingintheequation.Therearethreeterms,oneinthe
left expression and two in the expression on the right, so we look at each in turn:
[s]=L
[vt]=[v]·[t]=LT−1·T=LT0
=L
[0.5at2]=[a]·[t]2=LT−2·T2=LT0
=L.
All three terms have the same dimension, so this equation is dimensionally consistent.
b. Again,therearenotrigonometric,exponential,orlogarithmicfunctions,soweonlyneedtolookatthe
dimensions of each of the three terms appearing in the equation:
[s]=L
[vt2]=[v]·[t]2=LT−1·T2=LT
[at]=[a]·[t]=LT−2·T=LT−1.
None of the three terms has the same dimension as any other, so this is about as far from being
dimensionally consistent as you can get. The technical term for an equation like this isnonsense.
c. This equation has a trigonometric function in it, so first we should check that the argument of the sine
function is dimensionless:
⎡at2⎤ [a]·[t]2 LT−2·T2 L
⎣ s ⎦= [s] = L = L =1.
Theargumentisdimensionless.Sofar,sogood.Nowweneedtocheckthedimensionsofeachofthetwo
terms (that is, the left expression and the right expression) in the equation:
[v]=LT−1
⎡ ⎛at2⎞⎤
⎣sin ⎝ s ⎠⎦=1.
Thetwotermshavedifferentdimensions—meaning,theequationisnotdimensionallyconsistent.Thisequation
is another example of “nonsense.”
Significance
If we are trusting people, these types of dimensional checks might seem unnecessary. But, rest assured, any
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 25
textbookonaquantitativesubjectsuchasphysics(includingthisone)almostcertainlycontainssomeequations
withtypos.Checkingequationsroutinelybydimensionalanalysissaveustheembarrassmentofusinganincorrect
equation.Also,checkingthedimensionsofanequationweobtainthroughalgebraicmanipulationisagreatway
to make sure we did not make a mistake (or to spot a mistake, if we made one).
1.6 Check Your UnderstandingIs the equationv=atdimensionally consistent?
Onefurtherpointthatneedstobementionedistheeffectoftheoperationsofcalculusondimensions.Wehaveseenthat
dimensionsobeytherulesofalgebra,justlikeunits,butwhathappenswhenwetakethederivativeofonephysicalquantity
withrespecttoanotherorintegrateaphysicalquantityoveranother?Thederivativeofafunctionisjusttheslopeoftheline
tangenttoitsgraphandslopesareratios,soforphysicalquantitiesvandt,wehavethatthedimensionofthederivativeof
vwith respect totis just the ratio of the dimension ofvover that oft:
⎡dv⎤ [v]
= .
⎣dt⎦ [t]
Similarly, since integrals are just sums of products, the dimension of the integral of v with respect to t is simply the
dimension ofvtimes the dimension oft:
⎡ ⎤
∫vdt =[v]·[t].
⎣ ⎦
Bythesamereasoning,analogousrulesholdfortheunitsofphysicalquantitiesderivedfromotherquantitiesbyintegration
or differentiation.
1.5 | Estimates and Fermi Calculations
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Estimate the values of physical quantities.
On many occasions, physicists, other scientists, and engineers need to make estimates for a particular quantity. Other
terms sometimes used are guesstimates, order-of-magnitude approximations, back-of-the-envelope calculations, or Fermi
calculations.(ThephysicistEnricoFermimentionedearlierwasfamousforhisabilitytoestimatevariouskindsofdatawith
surprisingprecision.)Willthatpieceofequipmentfitinthebackofthecarordoweneedtorentatruck?Howlongwill
thisdownloadtake?Abouthowlargeacurrentwilltherebeinthiscircuitwhenitisturnedon?Howmanyhousescould
aproposedpowerplantactually powerifitisbuilt?Notethatestimating doesnotmeanguessinganumberoraformula
at random. Rather, estimation means using prior experience and sound physical reasoning to arrive at a rough idea of a
quantity’svalue.Becausetheprocessofdeterminingareliableapproximationusuallyinvolvestheidentificationofcorrect
physicalprinciplesandagoodguessabouttherelevantvariables,estimatingisveryusefulindevelopingphysicalintuition.
Estimatesalsoallowusperform“sanitychecks”oncalculationsorpolicyproposalsbyhelpingusruleoutcertainscenarios
orunrealisticnumbers.Theyallowustochallengeothers(aswellasourselves)inoureffortstolearntruthsabouttheworld.
Manyestimatesarebasedonformulasinwhichtheinputquantitiesareknownonlytoalimitedprecision.Asyoudevelop
physicsproblem-solvingskills(whichareapplicabletoawidevarietyoffields),youalsowilldevelopskillsatestimating.
Youdeveloptheseskillsbythinkingmorequantitativelyandbybeingwillingtotakerisks.Aswithanyskill,experience
helps. Familiarity with dimensions (see Table 1.3) and units (see Table 1.1 and Table 1.2), and the scales of base
quantities (seeFigure 1.4) also helps.
To make some progress in estimating, you need to have some definite ideas about how variables may be related. The
following strategies may help you in practicing the art of estimation:
• Get big lengths from smaller lengths. When estimating lengths, remember that anything can be a ruler. Thus,
imaginebreakingabigthingintosmallerthings,estimatethelengthofoneofthesmallerthings,andmultiplyto
get the length of the big thing. For example, to estimate the height of a building, first count how many floors it
has.Then,estimatehowbigasinglefloorisbyimagininghowmanypeoplewouldhavetostandoneachother’s26 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
shoulders to reach the ceiling. Last, estimate the height of a person. The product of these three estimates is your
estimate of the height of the building. It helps to have memorized a few length scales relevant to the sorts of
problems you find yourself solving. For example, knowing some of the length scales in Figure 1.4 might come
inhandy.Sometimesitalsohelpstodothisinreverse—thatis,toestimatethelengthofasmallthing,imaginea
bunchofthem making upabigger thing. Forexample, toestimate the thickness ofasheet ofpaper,estimate the
thicknessofastackofpaperandthendividebythenumberofpagesinthestack.Thesesamestrategiesofbreaking
bigthingsintosmallerthingsoraggregatingsmallerthingsintoabiggerthingcansometimesbeusedtoestimate
other physical quantities, such as masses and times.
• Getareasandvolumesfromlengths.Whendealingwithanareaoravolumeofacomplexobject,introduceasimple
modeloftheobjectsuchasasphereorabox.Then,estimatethelineardimensions(suchastheradiusofthesphere
orthelength,width,andheightofthebox)first,anduseyourestimatestoobtainthevolumeorareafromstandard
geometricformulas.Ifyouhappentohaveanestimateofanobject’sareaorvolume,youcanalsodothereverse;
that is, use standard geometric formulas to get an estimate of its linear dimensions.
• Getmassesfromvolumesanddensities.Whenestimatingmassesofobjects,itcanhelpfirsttoestimateitsvolume
andthentoestimateitsmassfromaroughestimateofitsaveragedensity(recall,densityhasdimensionmassover
lengthcubed,somassisdensitytimesvolume).Forthis,ithelpstorememberthatthedensityofairisaround1kg/
m3,thedensityofwateris103kg/m3,andthedensesteverydaysolidsmaxoutataround104kg/m3.Askingyourself
whetheranobjectfloatsorsinksineitherairorwatergetsyouaballparkestimateofitsdensity.Youcanalsodo
thistheotherwayaround;ifyouhaveanestimateofanobject’smassanditsdensity,youcanusethemtogetan
estimate of its volume.
• If all else fails, bound it. For physical quantities for which you do not have a lot of intuition, sometimes the best
youcandoisthinksomethinglike:Well,itmustbebiggerthanthisandsmallerthanthat.Forexample,suppose
youneedtoestimatethemassofamoose.Maybeyouhavealotofexperiencewithmooseandknowtheiraverage
massoffhand.Ifso,great.Butformostpeople,thebesttheycandoistothinksomethinglike:Itmustbebigger
thanaperson(oforder102kg)andlessthanacar(oforder103kg).Ifyouneedasinglenumberforasubsequent
calculation, you can take the geometric mean of the upper and lower bound—that is, you multiply them together
and then take the square root. For the moose mass example, this would be
0.5
⎛ 102 ×103⎞ =102.5 =100.5 ×102≈3×102kg.
⎝ ⎠
Thetighterthebounds,thebetter.Also,norulesareunbreakablewhenitcomestoestimation.Ifyouthinkthevalue
ofthequantityislikelytobeclosertotheupperboundthanthelowerbound,thenyoumaywanttobumpupyour
estimate from the geometric mean by an order or two of magnitude.
• One“sig.fig.”isfine.Thereisnoneedtogobeyondonesignificantfigurewhendoingcalculationstoobtainan
estimate.Inmostcases,theorderofmagnitudeisgoodenough.Thegoalisjusttogetintheballparkfigure,sokeep
the arithmetic as simple as possible.
• Askyourself:Doesthismakeanysense?Last,checktoseewhetheryouranswerisreasonable.Howdoesitcompare
withthevaluesofotherquantitieswiththesamedimensionsthatyoualreadyknoworcanlookupeasily?Ifyou
getsomewackyanswer(forexample,ifyouestimatethemassoftheAtlanticOceantobebiggerthanthemassof
Earth,orsometimespantobelongerthantheageoftheuniverse),firstchecktoseewhetheryourunitsarecorrect.
Then,checkforarithmetic errors.Then,rethinkthelogicyouusedtoarriveatyouranswer.Ifeverythingchecks
out, you may have just proved that some slick new idea is actually bogus.
Example 1.6
Mass of Earth’s Oceans
Estimate the total mass of the oceans on Earth.
Strategy
We know the density of water is about 103 kg/m3, so we start with the advice to “get masses from densities
andvolumes.”Thus,weneedtoestimatethevolumeoftheplanet’soceans.Usingtheadviceto“getareasand
volumesfromlengths,”wecanestimatethevolumeoftheoceansassurfaceareatimesaveragedepth,orV=AD.
WeknowthediameterofEarthfromFigure 1.4andweknowthatmostofEarth’ssurfaceiscoveredinwater,
so we can estimate the surface area of the oceans as being roughly equal to the surface area of the planet. By
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 27
followingtheadviceto“getareasandvolumesfromlengths”again,wecanapproximateEarthasasphereand
usetheformulaforthesurfaceareaofasphereofdiameterd—thatis, A=πd2, toestimatethesurfaceareaof
theoceans.Nowwejustneedtoestimatetheaveragedepthoftheoceans.Forthis,weusetheadvice:“Ifallelse
fails,boundit.”Wehappentoknowthedeepestpointsintheoceanarearound10kmandthatitisnotuncommon
fortheoceantobedeeperthan1km,sowetaketheaveragedepthtobearound (103 ×104)0.5 ≈3×103 m.
Now we just need to put it all together, heeding the advice that “one ‘sig. fig.’ is fine.”
Solution
We estimate the surface area of Earth (and hence the surface area of Earth’s oceans) to be roughly
A=πd2=π(107 m)2≈3×1014m2.
Next, using our average depth estimate of D=3×103 m, which was obtained by bounding, we estimate the
volume of Earth’s oceans to be
V = AD=(3×1014m2)(3×103 m)=9×1017 m3 .
Last, we estimate the mass of the world’s oceans to be
M = ρV =(103 kg/m3 )(9×1017 m3 )=9×1020 kg.
Thus, we estimate that the order of magnitude of the mass of the planet’s oceans is 1021kg.
Significance
Toverifyouranswertothebestofourability,wefirstneedtoanswerthequestion:Doesthismakeanysense?
FromFigure1.4,weseethemassofEarth’satmosphereisontheorderof1019kgandthemassofEarthison
theorderof1025kg.Itisreassuringthatourestimateof1021kgforthemassofEarth’soceansfallssomewhere
betweenthesetwo.So,yes,itdoesseemtomakesense.ItjustsohappensthatwedidasearchontheWebfor
“massofoceans”andthetopsearchresultsallsaid 1.4×1021kg, whichisthesameorderofmagnitudeasour
estimate.Now,ratherthanhavingtotrustblindlywhoeverfirstputthatnumberuponawebsite(mostoftheother
sites probably just copied it from them, after all), we can have a little more confidence in it.
1.7 Check Your Understanding Figure 1.4 says the mass of the atmosphere is 1019 kg. Assuming the
densityoftheatmosphereis1kg/m3,estimatetheheightofEarth’satmosphere.Doyouthinkyouranswerisan
underestimate or an overestimate? Explain why.
HowmanypianotunersarethereinNewYorkCity?Howmanyleavesareonthattree?Ifyouarestudyingphotosynthesis
orthinkingofwritingasmartphoneappforpianotuners,thentheanswerstothesequestionsmightbeofgreatinterestto
you.Otherwise, youprobablycouldn’tcarelesswhattheanswersare.However,theseareexactly thesortsofestimation
problemsthatpeopleinvarioustechindustrieshavebeenaskingpotentialemployeestoevaluatetheirquantitativereasoning
skills.Ifbuildingphysicalintuitionandevaluatingquantitativeclaimsdonotseemlikesufficientreasonsforyoutopractice
estimation problems, how about the fact that being good at them just might land you a high-paying job?
For practice estimating relative lengths, areas, and volumes, check out this PhET
(https://openstaxcollege.org/l/21lengthgame)simulation, titled “Estimation.”28 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
1.6 | Significant Figures
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the correct number of significant figures for the result of a computation.
• Describe the relationship between the concepts of accuracy, precision, uncertainty, and
discrepancy.
• Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement, given its value and its uncertainty.
• Determine the uncertainty of the result of a computation involving quantities with given
uncertainties.
Figure 1.11 shows two instruments used to measure the mass of an object. The digital scale has mostly replaced the
double-pan balance in physics labs because it gives more accurate and precise measurements. But what exactly do we
meanbyaccurateandprecise?Aren’ttheythesamething?Inthissectionweexamineindetailtheprocessofmakingand
reporting a measurement.
Figure 1.11 (a) A double-pan mechanical balance is used to compare different masses. Usually an object with unknown mass
is placed in one pan and objects of known mass are placed in the other pan. When the bar that connects the two pans is
horizontal, then the masses in both pans are equal. The “known masses” are typically metal cylinders of standard mass such as 1
g, 10 g, and 100 g. (b) Many mechanical balances, such as double-pan balances, have been replaced by digital scales, which can
typically measure the mass of an object more precisely. A mechanical balance may read only the mass of an object to the nearest
tenth of a gram, but many digital scales can measure the mass of an object up to the nearest thousandth of a gram. (credit a:
modification of work by Serge Melki; credit b: modification of work by Karel Jakubec)
Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Scienceisbasedonobservationandexperiment—thatis,onmeasurements.Accuracyishowcloseameasurementistothe
accepted reference value for that measurement. For example, let’s say we want to measure the length of standard printer
paper.Thepackaginginwhichwepurchasedthepaperstatesthatitis11.0in.long.Wethenmeasurethelengthofthepaper
threetimesandobtainthefollowingmeasurements:11.1in.,11.2in.,and10.9in.Thesemeasurementsarequiteaccurate
becausetheyareveryclosetothereferencevalueof11.0in.Incontrast,ifwehadobtainedameasurementof12in.,our
measurementwouldnotbeveryaccurate.Noticethattheconceptofaccuracyrequiresthatanacceptedreferencevaluebe
given.
Theprecisionofmeasurementsreferstohowclosetheagreementisbetweenrepeatedindependentmeasurements(which
are repeated under the same conditions). Consider the example of the paper measurements. The precision of the
measurements refers to the spread of the measured values. One way to analyze the precision of the measurements is to
determinetherange,ordifference,betweenthelowestandthehighestmeasuredvalues.Inthiscase,thelowestvaluewas
10.9in.andthehighestvaluewas11.2in.Thus,themeasuredvaluesdeviatedfromeachotherby,atmost,0.3in.These
measurementswererelativelyprecisebecausetheydidnotvarytoomuchinvalue.However,ifthemeasuredvalueshad
been10.9in.,11.1in.,and11.9in.,thenthemeasurementswouldnotbeveryprecisebecausetherewouldbesignificant
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 29
variationfromonemeasurementtoanother.Noticethattheconceptofprecisiondependsonlyontheactualmeasurements
acquired and does not depend on an accepted reference value.
Themeasurementsinthepaperexamplearebothaccurateandprecise,butinsomecases,measurementsareaccuratebut
not precise, or they are precise but not accurate. Let’s consider an example of a GPS attempting to locate the position
of a restaurant in a city. Think of the restaurant location as existing at the center of a bull’s-eye target and think of each
GPSattempttolocatetherestaurantasablackdot.InFigure 1.12(a),weseetheGPSmeasurementsarespreadoutfar
apart from each other, but they are all relatively close to the actual location of the restaurant at the center of the target.
Thisindicatesalow-precision,high-accuracymeasuringsystem.However,inFigure1.12(b),theGPSmeasurementsare
concentrated quite closely to one another, but they are far away from the target location. This indicates a high-precision,
low-accuracy measuring system.
Figure 1.12 A GPS attempts to locate a restaurant at the center of the bull’s-eye. The
black dots represent each attempt to pinpoint the location of the restaurant. (a) The dots
are spread out quite far apart from one another, indicating low precision, but they are each
rather close to the actual location of the restaurant, indicating high accuracy. (b) The dots
are concentrated rather closely to one another, indicating high precision, but they are
rather far away from the actual location of the restaurant, indicating low accuracy. (credit
a and credit b: modification of works by "DarkEvil"/Wikimedia Commons)
Accuracy, Precision, Uncertainty, and Discrepancy
The precision of a measuring system is related to the uncertainty in the measurements whereas the accuracy is related
tothediscrepancyfromtheacceptedreferencevalue.Uncertaintyisaquantitativemeasureofhowmuchyourmeasured
valuesdeviatefromoneanother.Therearemanydifferentmethodsofcalculatinguncertainty,eachofwhichisappropriate
todifferentsituations.Someexamplesincludetakingtherange(thatis,thebiggestlessthesmallest)orfindingthestandard
deviationofthemeasurements.Discrepancy(or“measurementerror”)isthedifferencebetweenthemeasuredvalueanda
givenstandardorexpectedvalue.Ifthemeasurementsarenotveryprecise,thentheuncertaintyofthevaluesishigh.Ifthe
measurements are not very accurate, then the discrepancy of the values is high.
Recallourexampleofmeasuringpaperlength;weobtainedmeasurementsof11.1in.,11.2in.,and10.9in.,andtheaccepted
valuewas11.0in.Wemightaveragethethreemeasurementstosayourbestguessis11.1in.;inthiscase,ourdiscrepancy
is11.1–11.0=0.1in.,whichprovidesaquantitativemeasureofaccuracy.Wemightcalculatetheuncertaintyinourbest
guessbyusingtherangeofourmeasuredvalues:0.3in.Thenwewouldsaythelengthofthepaperis11.1in.plusorminus
0.3in.Theuncertaintyinameasurement,A,isoftendenotedasδA(read“deltaA”),sothemeasurementresultwouldbe
recorded as A ± δA. Returning to our paper example, the measured length of the paper could be expressed as 11.1 ± 0.3
in.Sincethediscrepancyof0.1in.islessthantheuncertaintyof0.3in.,wemightsaythemeasuredvalueagreeswiththe
accepted reference value to within experimental uncertainty.
Some factors that contribute to uncertainty in a measurement include the following:
• Limitations of the measuring device
• The skill of the person taking the measurement
• Irregularities in the object being measured
• Any other factors that affect the outcome (highly dependent on the situation)
Inourexample,suchfactorscontributingtotheuncertaintycouldbethesmallestdivisionontheruleris1/16in.,theperson
usingtherulerhasbadeyesight,therulerisworndownononeend,oronesideofthepaperisslightlylongerthantheother.30 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
Atanyrate,theuncertaintyinameasurementmustbecalculatedtoquantifyitsprecision.Ifareferencevalueisknown,it
makes sense to calculate the discrepancy as well to quantify its accuracy.
Percent uncertainty
Another method of expressing uncertainty is as a percent of the measured value. If a measurement A is expressed with
uncertaintyδA, thepercent uncertaintyis defined as
δA
Percent uncertainty= ×100%.
A
Example 1.7
Calculating Percent Uncertainty: A Bag of Apples
Agrocerystoresells5-lbbagsofapples.Let’ssaywepurchasefourbagsduringthecourseofamonthandweigh
the bags each time. We obtain the following measurements:
• Week 1 weight: 4.8 lb
• Week 2 weight: 5.3 lb
• Week 3 weight: 4.9 lb
• Week 4 weight: 5.4 lb
Wethendeterminetheaverageweightofthe5-lbbagofapplesis5.1±0.2lb.Whatisthepercentuncertaintyof
the bag’s weight?
Strategy
First,observethattheaveragevalueofthebag’sweight,A,is5.1lb.Theuncertaintyinthisvalue, δA, is0.2lb.
We can use the following equation to determine the percent uncertainty of the weight:
δA (1.1)
Percent uncertainty= ×100%.
A
Solution
Substitute the values into the equation:
Percent uncertainty= δA ×100%= 0.2lb ×100%=3.9%≈4%.
A 5.1lb
Significance
We can conclude the average weight of a bag of apples from this store is 5.1 lb ± 4%. Notice the percent
uncertaintyisdimensionlessbecausetheunitsofweightin δA=0.2 lbcanceledthoseinA=5.1lbwhenwe
took the ratio.
1.8 Check Your Understanding A high school track coach has just purchased a new stopwatch. The
stopwatch manual states the stopwatch has an uncertainty of ±0.05 s. Runners on the track coach’s team
regularlyclock100-msprintsof11.49sto15.01s.Attheschool’slasttrackmeet,thefirst-placesprintercame
in at 12.04 s and the second-place sprinter came in at 12.07 s. Will the coach’s new stopwatch be helpful in
timing the sprint team? Why or why not?
Uncertainties in calculations
Uncertainty exists in anything calculated from measured quantities. For example, the area of a floor calculated from
measurementsofitslengthandwidthhasanuncertaintybecausethelengthandwidthhaveuncertainties.Howbigisthe
uncertaintyinsomethingyoucalculatebymultiplicationordivision?Ifthemeasurementsgoingintothecalculationhave
smalluncertainties(afewpercentorless),thenthemethodofaddingpercentscanbeusedformultiplicationordivision.
Thismethodstatesthepercentuncertaintyinaquantitycalculatedbymultiplicationordivisionisthesumofthepercent
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 31
uncertaintiesintheitemsusedtomakethecalculation.Forexample,ifafloorhasalengthof4.00mandawidthof3.00m,
withuncertaintiesof2%and1%,respectively,thentheareaoftheflooris12.0m2andhasanuncertaintyof3%.(Expressed
asanarea,thisis0.36m2[12.0m2 ×0.03],whichweroundto0.4m2sincetheareaofthefloorisgiventoatenthofa
square meter.)
Precision of Measuring Tools and Significant Figures
An important factor in the precision of measurements involves the precision of the measuring tool. In general, a precise
measuringtoolisonethatcanmeasurevaluesinverysmallincrements.Forexample,astandardrulercanmeasurelengthto
thenearestmillimeterwhereasacalipercanmeasurelengthtothenearest0.01mm.Thecaliperisamoreprecisemeasuring
toolbecauseitcanmeasureextremelysmalldifferencesinlength.Themoreprecisethemeasuringtool,themoreprecise
the measurements.
Whenweexpressmeasuredvalues,wecanonlylistasmanydigitsaswemeasuredinitiallywithourmeasuringtool.For
example,ifweuseastandardrulertomeasurethelengthofastick,wemaymeasureittobe36.7cm.Wecan’texpressthis
valueas36.71cmbecauseourmeasuringtoolisnotpreciseenoughtomeasureahundredthofacentimeter.Itshouldbe
notedthatthelastdigitinameasuredvaluehasbeenestimatedinsomewaybythepersonperformingthemeasurement.For
example,thepersonmeasuringthelengthofastickwitharulernoticesthesticklengthseemstobesomewhereinbetween
36.6cmand36.7cm,andheorshemustestimatethevalueofthelastdigit.Usingthemethodofsignificantfigures,the
ruleisthatthelastdigitwrittendowninameasurementisthefirstdigitwithsomeuncertainty.Todeterminethenumber
ofsignificantdigitsinavalue,startwiththefirstmeasuredvalueattheleftandcountthenumberofdigitsthroughthelast
digitwrittenontheright.Forexample,themeasuredvalue36.7cmhasthreedigits,orthreesignificantfigures.Significant
figures indicate the precision of the measuring tool used to measure a value.
Zeros
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.053 are not significant because
they are placeholders that locate the decimal point. There are two significant figures in 0.053. The zeros in 10.053 are
not placeholders; they are significant. This number has five significant figures. The zeros in 1300 may or may not be
significant, depending on the style of writing numbers. They could mean the number is known to the last digit or they
couldbeplaceholders.So1300couldhavetwo,three,orfoursignificantfigures.Toavoidthisambiguity,weshouldwrite
1300inscientificnotationas 1.3×103 , 1.30×103 , or 1.300×103 , dependingonwhetherithastwo,three,orfour
significant figures.Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placeholders.
Significant figures in calculations
Whencombiningmeasurementswithdifferentdegreesofprecision,thenumberofsignificantdigitsinthefinalanswercan
benogreaterthanthenumberofsignificantdigitsintheleast-precisemeasuredvalue.Therearetwodifferentrules,one
for multiplication and division and the other for addition and subtraction.
1. For multiplication and division, the result should have the same number of significant figures as the quantity
withtheleastnumberofsignificantfiguresenteringintothecalculation.Forexample,theareaofacirclecanbe
calculatedfromitsradiususingA=πr2.Let’sseehowmanysignificantfigurestheareahasiftheradiushasonly
two—say,r= 1.2 m. Using a calculator with an eight-digit output, we would calculate
A=πr2=(3.1415927…)×(1.2m)2=4.5238934m2.
Butbecausetheradiushasonlytwosignificantfigures,itlimitsthecalculatedquantitytotwosignificantfigures,or
A=4.5m2,
althoughπis good to at least eight digits.
2. Foradditionandsubtraction,theanswercancontainnomoredecimalplacesthantheleast-precisemeasurement.
Supposewebuy7.56kgofpotatoesinagrocerystoreasmeasuredwithascalewithprecision0.01kg,thenwedrop
off6.052kgofpotatoesatyourlaboratoryasmeasuredbyascalewithprecision0.001kg.Then,wegohomeand
add13.7kgofpotatoesasmeasuredbyabathroomscalewithprecision0.1kg.Howmanykilogramsofpotatoesdo
wenowhaveandhowmanysignificantfiguresareappropriateintheanswer?Themassisfoundbysimpleaddition
and subtraction:32 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
7.56kg
−6.052kg
+13.7kg
=15.2kg.
15.208kg
Next,weidentifytheleast-precisemeasurement:13.7kg.Thismeasurementisexpressedtothe0.1decimalplace,
soourfinalanswermustalsobeexpressedtothe0.1decimalplace.Thus,theanswerisroundedtothetenthsplace,
giving us 15.2 kg.
Significant figures in this text
In this text, most numbers are assumed to have three significant figures. Furthermore, consistent numbers of significant
figures are used in all worked examples. An answer given to three digits is based on input good to at least three digits,
for example. If the input has fewer significant figures, the answer will also have fewer significant figures. Care is also
takenthatthenumberofsignificantfiguresisreasonableforthesituationposed.Insometopics,particularlyinoptics,more
accuratenumbersareneededandweusemorethanthreesignificantfigures.Finally,ifanumberisexact,suchasthetwo
intheformulaforthecircumferenceofacircle,C=2πr,itdoesnotaffectthenumberofsignificantfiguresinacalculation.
Likewise,conversionfactorssuchas100cm/1mareconsideredexactanddonotaffectthenumberofsignificantfiguresin
a calculation.
1.7 | Solving Problems in Physics
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the process for developing a problem-solving strategy.
• Explain how to find the numerical solution to a problem.
• Summarize the process for assessing the significance of the numerical solution to a problem.
Figure 1.13 Problem-solving skills are essential to your success in physics. (credit:
“scui3asteveo”/Flickr)
Problem-solving skills are clearly essential to success in a quantitative course in physics. More important, the ability
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 33
to apply broad physical principles—usually represented by equations—to specific situations is a very powerful form of
knowledge.Itismuchmorepowerfulthanmemorizingalistoffacts.Analyticalskillsandproblem-solvingabilitiescanbe
appliedtonewsituationswhereasalistoffactscannotbemadelongenoughtocontaineverypossiblecircumstance.Such
analytical skills are useful both for solving problems in this text and for applying physics in everyday life.
Asyouareprobablywellaware,acertainamountofcreativityandinsightisrequiredtosolveproblems.Norigidprocedure
workseverytime.Creativityandinsightgrowwithexperience.Withpractice,thebasicsofproblemsolvingbecomealmost
automatic. One way to get practice is to work out the text’s examples for yourself as you read. Another is to work as
many end-of-section problems as possible, starting with the easiest to build confidence and then progressing to the more
difficult.Afteryoubecomeinvolvedinphysics,youwillseeitallaroundyou,andyoucanbegintoapplyittosituations
you encounter outside the classroom, just as is done in many of the applications in this text.
Althoughthereisnosimplestep-by-stepmethodthatworksforeveryproblem,thefollowingthree-stageprocessfacilitates
problem solving and makes it more meaningful. The three stages are strategy, solution, and significance. This process is
used in examples throughout the book. Here, we look at each stage of the process in turn.
Strategy
Strategyisthebeginningstageofsolvingaproblem.Theideaistofigureoutexactlywhattheproblemisandthendevelop
a strategy for solving it. Some general advice for this stage is as follows:
• Examinethesituationtodeterminewhichphysicalprinciplesareinvolved.Itoftenhelpstodrawasimplesketch
at the outset. You often need to decide which direction is positive and note that on your sketch. When you have
identified the physical principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equations representing those principles.
Althoughfindingthecorrectequationisessential,keepinmindthatequationsrepresentphysicalprinciples,lawsof
nature,andrelationshipsamongphysicalquantities.Withoutaconceptualunderstandingofaproblem,anumerical
solution is meaningless.
• Makealistofwhatisgivenorcanbeinferredfromtheproblemasstated(identifythe“knowns”).Manyproblems
arestatedverysuccinctlyandrequiresomeinspectiontodeterminewhatisknown.Drawingasketchcanbevery
usefulatthispointaswell.Formallyidentifyingtheknownsisofparticularimportanceinapplyingphysicstoreal-
worldsituations.Forexample,thewordstoppedmeansthevelocityiszeroatthatinstant.Also,wecanoftentake
initial time and position as zero by the appropriate choice of coordinate system.
• Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). In complex problems,
especially,itisnotalwaysobviouswhatneedstobefoundorinwhatsequence.Makingalistcanhelpidentifythe
unknowns.
• Determinewhichphysicalprinciplescanhelpyousolvetheproblem.Sincephysicalprinciplestendtobeexpressed
intheformofmathematical equations, alistofknownsandunknownscanhelphere.Itiseasiest ifyoucanfind
equations that contain only one unknown—that is, all the other variables are known—so you can solve for the
unknowneasily.Iftheequationcontainsmorethanoneunknown,thenadditionalequationsareneededtosolvethe
problem.Insomeproblems,severalunknownsmustbedeterminedtogetattheoneneededmost.Insuchproblems
itisespeciallyimportanttokeepphysicalprinciplesinmindtoavoidgoingastrayinaseaofequations.Youmay
have to use two (or more) different equations to get the final answer.
Solution
Thesolutionstageiswhenyoudothemath.Substitute theknowns(alongwiththeirunits)intotheappropriateequation
andobtainnumericalsolutionscompletewithunits.Thatis,dothealgebra,calculus,geometry,orarithmeticnecessaryto
find the unknown from the knowns, being sure to carry the units through the calculations. This step is clearly important
because it produces the numerical answer, along with its units. Notice, however, that this stage is only one-third of the
overall problem-solving process.
Significance
After having done the math in the solution stage of problem solving, it is tempting to think you are done. But, always
rememberthatphysicsisnotmath.Rather,indoingphysics,weusemathematicsasatooltohelpusunderstandnature.So,
after you obtain a numerical answer, you should always assess its significance:
• Checkyourunits.Iftheunitsoftheanswerareincorrect,thenanerrorhasbeenmadeandyoushouldgobackover
yourpreviousstepstofindit.Onewaytofindthemistakeistocheckalltheequationsyouderivedfordimensional
consistency.However,bewarnedthatcorrectunitsdonotguaranteethenumericalpartoftheanswerisalsocorrect.34 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
• Checktheanswertoseewhetheritisreasonable.Doesitmakesense?Thisstepisextremelyimportant:–thegoal
ofphysicsistodescribenatureaccurately.Todeterminewhethertheanswerisreasonable,checkbothitsmagnitude
and its sign, in addition to its units. The magnitude should be consistent with a rough estimate of what it should
be.Itshouldalsocomparereasonablywithmagnitudesofotherquantitiesofthesametype.Thesignusuallytells
youaboutdirectionandshouldbeconsistentwithyourpriorexpectations.Yourjudgmentwillimproveasyousolve
morephysicsproblems,anditwillbecomepossibleforyoutomakefinerjudgmentsregardingwhethernatureis
describedadequatelybytheanswertoaproblem.Thisstepbringstheproblembacktoitsconceptualmeaning.If
youcanjudgewhethertheanswerisreasonable,youhaveadeeperunderstandingofphysicsthanjustbeingableto
solve a problem mechanically.
• Check to see whether the answer tells you something interesting. What does it mean? This is the flip side of the
question:Doesitmakesense?Ultimately,physicsisaboutunderstandingnature,andwesolvephysicsproblemsto
learn alittle something about hownature operates. Therefore, assuming the answer doesmake sense, youshould
alwaystakeamomenttoseeifittellsyousomethingabouttheworldthatyoufindinteresting.Eveniftheanswerto
thisparticularproblemisnotveryinterestingtoyou,whataboutthemethodyouusedtosolveit?Couldthemethod
be adapted to answer a question that you do find interesting? In many ways, it is in answering questions such as
these that science progresses.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 35
CHAPTER 1 REVIEW
KEY TERMS
accuracy the degree to which a measured value agrees with an accepted reference value for that measurement
base quantity physicalquantitychosenbyconventionandpracticalconsiderationssuchthatallotherphysicalquantities
can be expressed as algebraic combinations of them
base unit standardforexpressingthemeasurementofabasequantitywithinaparticularsystemofunits;definedbya
particular procedure used to measure the corresponding base quantity
conversion factor a ratio that expresses how many of one unit are equal to another unit
derived quantity physical quantity defined using algebraic combinations of base quantities
derived units units that can be calculated using algebraic combinations of the fundamental units
dimension expressionofthedependenceofaphysicalquantityonthebasequantitiesasaproductofpowersofsymbols
representingthebasequantities;ingeneral,thedimensionofaquantityhastheform LaMbTcIdΘeNfJg forsome
powers a, b, c, d, e, f, and g.
dimensionally consistent equation in which every term has the same dimensions and the arguments of any
mathematical functions appearing in the equation are dimensionless
dimensionless quantitywithadimensionof L0 M0 T0 I0 Θ0 N0 J0 =1; alsocalledquantityofdimension1orapure
number
discrepancy the difference between the measured value and a given standard or expected value
English units system of measurement used in the United States; includes units of measure such as feet, gallons, and
pounds
estimation usingpriorexperienceandsoundphysicalreasoningtoarriveataroughideaofaquantity’svalue;sometimes
calledan“order-of-magnitudeapproximation,”a“guesstimate,”a“back-of-the-envelopecalculation”,ora“Fermi
calculation”
kilogram SI unit for mass, abbreviated kg
law description, using concise language or a mathematical formula, of a generalized pattern in nature supported by
scientific evidence and repeated experiments
meter SI unit for length, abbreviated m
method of adding percents thepercentuncertaintyinaquantitycalculatedbymultiplicationordivisionisthesumof
the percent uncertainties in the items used to make the calculation.
metric system system in which values can be calculated in factors of 10
model representation of something often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly
order of magnitude the size of a quantity as it relates to a power of 10
percent uncertainty the ratio of the uncertainty of a measurement to the measured value, expressed as a percentage
physical quantity characteristic or property of an object that can be measured or calculated from other measurements
physics science concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time; especially interested in
what fundamental mechanisms underlie every phenomenon
precision the degree to which repeated measurements agree with each other
second the SI unit for time, abbreviated s
SI units the international system of units that scientists in most countries have agreed to use; includes units such as
meters, liters, and grams
significant figures used to express the precision of a measuring tool used to measure a value36 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
theory
testableexplanationforpatternsinnaturesupportedbyscientificevidenceandverifiedmultipletimesbyvarious
groups of researchers
uncertainty a quantitative measure of how much measured values deviate from one another
units standards used for expressing and comparing measurements
KEY EQUATIONS
δA
Percent uncertainty Percent uncertainty= ×100%
A
SUMMARY
1.1The Scope and Scale of Physics
• Physics is about trying to find the simple laws that describe all natural phenomena.
• Physics operates on a vast range of scales of length, mass, and time. Scientists use the concept of the order of
magnitude of a number to track which phenomena occur on which scales. They also use orders of magnitude to
compare the various scales.
• Scientists attempt to describe the world by formulating models, theories, and laws.
1.2Units and Standards
• Systems of units are built up from a small number of base units, which are defined by accurate and precise
measurementsofconventionallychosenbasequantities.Otherunitsarethenderivedasalgebraiccombinationsof
the base units.
• TwocommonlyusedsystemsofunitsareEnglishunitsandSIunits.Allscientistsandmostoftheotherpeoplein
the world use SI, whereas nonscientists in the United States still tend to use English units.
• The SI base units of length, mass, and time are the meter (m), kilogram (kg), and second (s), respectively.
• SI units are a metric system of units, meaning values can be calculated by factors of 10. Metric prefixes may be
used with metric units to scale the base units to sizes appropriate for almost any application.
1.3Unit Conversion
• Toconvertaquantityfromoneunittoanother,multiplybyconversionsfactorsinsuchawaythatyoucancelthe
units you want to get rid of and introduce the units you want to end up with.
• Becarefulwithareasandvolumes.Unitsobeytherulesofalgebraso,forexample,ifaunitissquaredweneedtwo
factors to cancel it.
1.4Dimensional Analysis
• The dimension of a physical quantity is just an expression of the base quantities from which it is derived.
• Allequationsexpressingphysicallawsorprinciplesmustbedimensionallyconsistent.Thisfactcanbeusedasan
aidinrememberingphysicallaws,asawaytocheckwhetherclaimedrelationshipsbetweenphysicalquantitiesare
possible, and even to derive new physical laws.
1.5Estimates and Fermi Calculations
• An estimate is a rough educated guess at the value of a physical quantity based on prior experience and sound
physical reasoning. Some strategies that may help when making an estimate are as follows:
◦ Get big lengths from smaller lengths.
◦ Get areas and volumes from lengths.
◦ Get masses from volumes and densities.
◦ If all else fails, bound it.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 37
◦ One “sig. fig.” is fine.
◦ Ask yourself: Does this make any sense?
1.6Significant Figures
• Accuracyofameasuredvaluereferstohowcloseameasurementistoanacceptedreferencevalue.Thediscrepancy
in a measurement is the amount by which the measurement result differs from this value.
• Precisionofmeasuredvaluesreferstohowclosetheagreementisbetweenrepeatedmeasurements.Theuncertainty
of a measurement is a quantification of this.
• Theprecisionofameasuringtoolisrelatedtothesizeofitsmeasurementincrements.Thesmallerthemeasurement
increment, the more precise the tool.
• Significant figures express the precision of a measuring tool.
• Whenmultiplyingordividingmeasuredvalues,thefinalanswercancontainonlyasmanysignificantfiguresasthe
value with the least number of significant figures.
• Whenaddingorsubtractingmeasuredvalues,thefinalanswercannotcontainmoredecimalplacesthantheleast-
precise value.
1.7Solving Problems in Physics
The three stages of the process for solving physics problems used in this book are as follows:
• Strategy: Determine which physical principles are involved and develop a strategy for using them to solve the
problem.
• Solution: Do the math necessary to obtain a numerical solution complete with units.
• Significance: Check the solution to make sure it makes sense (correct units, reasonable magnitude and sign) and
assess its significance.
CONCEPTUAL QUESTIONS
1.1The Scope and Scale of Physics 1.2Units and Standards
1. What is physics? 7. Identify some advantages of metric units.
2. Some have described physics as a “search for 8. What are the SI base units of length, mass, and time?
simplicity.” Explain why this might be an appropriate
description. 9. Whatisthedifferencebetweenabaseunitandaderived
unit?(b)Whatisthedifferencebetweenabasequantityand
3. If two different theories describe experimental a derived quantity? (c) What is the difference between a
observationsequallywell,canonebesaidtobemorevalid base quantity and a base unit?
than the other (assuming both use accepted rules of logic)?
10. For each of the following scenarios, refer to Figure
4. What determines the validity of a theory? 1.4 and Table 1.2 to determine which metric prefix on
the meter is most appropriate for each of the following
5. Certain criteria must be satisfied if a measurement or scenarios.(a)Youwanttotabulatethemeandistancefrom
observation is to be believed. Will the criteria necessarily the Sun for each planet in the solar system. (b) You want
be as strict for an expected result as for an unexpected to compare the sizes of some common viruses to design a
result? mechanicalfiltercapableofblockingthepathogenicones.
(c)Youwanttolistthediametersofalltheelementsonthe
periodic table. (d) You want to list the distances to all the
6. Can the validity of a model be limited or must it be
starsthathavenowreceivedanyradiobroadcastssentfrom
universallyvalid?Howdoesthiscomparewiththerequired
Earth 10 years ago.
validity of a theory or a law?38 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
1.6Significant Figures 1.7Solving Problems in Physics
11. (a) What is the relationship between the precision 12. What information do you need to choose which
and the uncertainty of a measurement? (b) What is the equation or equations to use to solve a problem?
relationshipbetweentheaccuracyandthediscrepancyofa
measurement? 13. What should you do after obtaining a numerical
answer when solving a problem?
PROBLEMS
19. Calculate the approximate number of atoms in a
1.1The Scope and Scale of Physics bacterium. Assume the average mass of an atom in the
bacterium is 10 times the mass of a proton.
14. Findtheorderofmagnitudeofthefollowingphysical
quantities. (a) The mass of Earth’s atmosphere:
5.1×1018 kg; (b) The mass of the Moon’s atmosphere: 20. (a) Calculate the number of cells in a hummingbird
assumingthemassofanaveragecellis10timesthemass
25,000 kg; (c) The mass of Earth’s hydrosphere:
of a bacterium. (b) Making the same assumption, how
1.4×1021kg; (d) The mass of Earth: 5.97×1024kg; many cells are there in a human?
(e) The mass of the Moon: 7.34×1022kg; (f) The
21. Assumingonenerveimpulsemustendbeforeanother
Earth–Moondistance(semimajoraxis): 3.84×108 m; (g) can begin, what is the maximum firing rate of a nerve in
impulses per second?
The mean Earth–Sun distance: 1.5×1011m; (h) The
equatorialradiusofEarth: 6.38×106 m; (i)Themassof 22. About how many floating-point operations can a
an electron: 9.11×10−31 kg; (j) The mass of a proton: supercomputer perform each year?
1.67×10−27 kg; (k) The mass of the Sun:
23. Roughly how many floating-point operations can a
30 supercomputer perform in a human lifetime?
1.99×10 kg.
15. Usetheordersofmagnitudeyoufoundintheprevious
1.2Units and Standards
problem to answer the following questions to within an
orderofmagnitude.(a)Howmanyelectronswouldittake 24. The following times are given using metric prefixes
toequalthemassofaproton?(b)HowmanyEarthswould on the base SI unit of time: the second. Rewrite them in
it take to equal the mass of the Sun? (c) How many scientific notation without the prefix. For example, 47 Ts
Earth–Moon distances would it take to cover the distance wouldberewrittenas 4.7×1013 s. (a)980Ps;(b)980fs;
from Earth to the Sun? (d) How many Moon atmospheres (c) 17 ns; (d) 577µs.
wouldittaketoequalthemassofEarth’satmosphere?(e)
HowmanymoonswouldittaketoequalthemassofEarth?
(f) How many protons would it take to equal the mass of 25. Thefollowingtimesaregiveninseconds.Usemetric
the Sun? prefixes to rewrite them so the numerical value is greater
than one but less than 1000. For example, 7.9×10−2s
For the remaining questions, you need to use Figure 1.4 couldbewrittenaseither7.9csor79ms.(a) 9.57×105 s;
to obtain the necessary orders of magnitude of lengths,
masses, and times. (b) 0.045 s; (c) 5.5×10−7 s; (d) 3.16×107 s.
16. Roughly how many heartbeats are there in a lifetime?
26. Thefollowinglengthsaregivenusingmetricprefixes
on the base SI unit of length: the meter. Rewrite them in
17. A generation is about one-third of a lifetime.
scientificnotationwithouttheprefix.Forexample,4.2Pm
Approximately how many generations have passed since
the year 0 AD? wouldberewrittenas 4.2×1015 m. (a)89Tm;(b)89pm;
(c) 711 mm; (d) 0.45µm.
18. Roughlyhowmanytimeslongerthanthemeanlifeof
an extremely unstable atomic nucleus is the lifetime of a
27. Thefollowinglengthsaregiveninmeters.Usemetric
human?
prefixes to rewrite them so the numerical value is bigger
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 39
than one but less than 1000. For example, 7.9×10−2m 37. MountEverest,at29,028ft,isthetallestmountainon
Earth.Whatisitsheightinkilometers?(Assumethat1m=
could be written either as 7.9 cm or 79 mm. (a)
3.281 ft.)
7.59×107 m; (b) 0.0074 m; (c) 8.8×10−11m; (d)
1.63×1013 m. 38. The speed of sound is measured to be 342 m/s on
a certain day. What is this measurement in kilometers per
hour?
28. The following masses are written using metric
prefixes on the gram. Rewrite them in scientific notation
in terms of the SI base unit of mass: the kilogram. For 39. TectonicplatesarelargesegmentsofEarth’scrustthat
moveslowly.Supposeonesuchplatehasanaveragespeed
example, 40 Mg would be written as 4×104kg. (a) 23
of 4.0 cm/yr. (a) What distance does it move in 1.0 s at
mg; (b) 320 Tg; (c) 42 ng; (d) 7 g; (e) 9 Pg.
thisspeed? (b)What isitsspeedinkilometers permillion
years?
29. The following masses are given in kilograms. Use
metric prefixes on the gram to rewrite them so the
40. The average distance between Earth and the Sun is
numerical value is bigger than one but less than 1000.
1.5×1011m. (a)CalculatetheaveragespeedofEarthin
For example, 7×10−4kg could be written as 70 cg or
itsorbit(assumedtobecircular)inmeterspersecond.(b)
700 mg. (a) 3.8×10−5 kg; (b) 2.3×1017 kg; (c) What is this speed in miles per hour?
2.4×10−11kg; (d) 8×1015 kg; (e) 4.2×10−3 kg. 41. The density of nuclear matter is about 1018 kg/m3.
Given that 1 mL is equal in volume to cm3, what is the
densityofnuclearmatterinmegagramspermicroliter(that
1.3Unit Conversion is, Mg/µL)?
30. The volume of Earth is on the order of 1021 m3.
(a) What is this in cubic kilometers (km3)? (b) What is it 42. The density of aluminum is 2.7 g/cm3. What is the
in cubic miles (mi3)? (c) What is it in cubic centimeters density in kilograms per cubic meter?
(cm3)?
43. AcommonlyusedunitofmassintheEnglishsystem
31. The speed limit on some interstate highways is is the pound-mass, abbreviated lbm, where 1 lbm = 0.454
roughly 100 km/h. (a) What is this in meters per second? kg. What is the density of water in pound-mass per cubic
(b) How many miles per hour is this? foot?
32. Acaristravelingataspeedof33m/s.(a)Whatisits 44. A furlong is 220 yd. A fortnight is 2 weeks. Convert
speedinkilometersperhour?(b)Isitexceedingthe90km/ a speed of one furlong per fortnight to millimeters per
h speed limit? second.
33. InSIunits,speedsaremeasuredinmeterspersecond 45. Ittakes 2π radians(rad)togetaroundacircle,which
(m/s). But, depending on where you live, you’re probably
is the same as 360°. How many radians are in 1°?
more comfortable of thinking of speeds in terms of either
kilometers per hour (km/h) or miles per hour (mi/h). In
this problem, you will see that 1 m/s is roughly 4 km/h 46. Light travels a distance of about 3×108 m/s. A
or 2 mi/h, which is handy to use when developing your light-minuteisthedistancelighttravelsin1min.IftheSun
physical intuition. More precisely, show that (a) is 1.5×1011m from Earth, how far away is it in light-
1.0m/s=3.6km/h and (b) 1.0m/s=2.2mi/h.
minutes?
34. American football is played on a 100-yd-long field,
47. Alight-nanosecondisthedistancelighttravelsin1ns.
excluding the end zones. How long is the field in meters?
Convert 1 ft to light-nanoseconds.
(Assume that 1 m = 3.281 ft.)
48. Anelectronhasamassof 9.11×10−31 kg. Aproton
35. Soccerfieldsvaryinsize.Alargesoccerfieldis115
m long and 85.0 m wide. What is its area in square feet? has a mass of 1.67×10−27 kg. What is the mass of a
(Assume that 1 m = 3.281 ft.)
proton in electron-masses?
36. Whatistheheightinmetersofapersonwhois6ft1.0
49. Afluidounceisabout30mL.Whatisthevolumeofa
in. tall?
12 fl-oz can of soda pop in cubic meters?40 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
59. EstimatethenumberofmoleculesthatmakeupEarth,
1.4Dimensional Analysis assuming an average molecular mass of 30 g/mol. (Note
there are on the order of 1024objects per mole.)
50. Astudent istrying toremember some formulas from
geometry. In what follows, assume A is area, V is
60. Estimate the surface area of a person.
volume, and all other variables are lengths. Determine
which formulas are dimensionally consistent. (a)
V =πr2h; (b) A=2πr2+2πrh; (c) V =0.5bh; (d) 61. Roughlyhowmanysolarsystemswouldittaketotile
the disk of the Milky Way?
V =πd2; (e) V =πd3 /6.
62. (a)EstimatethedensityoftheMoon.(b)Estimatethe
51. Consider the physical quantities s, v, a, and t with diameter of the Moon. (c) Given that the Moon subtends
dimensions [s]=L, [v]=LT−1, [a]=LT−2, and at an angle of about half a degree in the sky, estimate its
distance from Earth.
[t]=T. Determine whether each of the following
equations is dimensionally consistent. (a) v2=2as; (b) 63. TheaveragedensityoftheSunisontheorder103kg/
m3.(a)EstimatethediameteroftheSun.(b)Giventhatthe
s=vt2+0.5at2; (c) v=s/t; (d) a=v/t.
Sunsubtendsatanangleofabouthalfadegreeinthesky,
estimate its distance from Earth.
52. Consider the physical quantities m, s, v, a,
and t with dimensions [m] = M, [s] = L, [v] = LT–1, 64. Estimate the mass of a virus.
[a] = LT–2, and [t] = T. Assuming each of the following
equations is dimensionally consistent, find the dimension 65. A floating-point operation is a single arithmetic
ofthequantityontheleft-handsideoftheequation:(a)F= operation such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, or
ma; (b)K= 0.5mv2; (c)p=mv; (d)W=mas; (e)L = mvr. division. (a) Estimate the maximum number of floating-
point operations a human being could possibly perform in
53. Suppose quantity s is a length and quantity t is a alifetime. (b)Howlongwouldittakeasupercomputerto
perform that many floating-point operations?
time. Suppose the quantities v and a are defined by v
= ds/dt and a = dv/dt. (a) What is the dimension of v?
(b)Whatisthedimensionofthequantitya?Whatarethe
1.6Significant Figures
dimensions of (c) ∫vdt, (d) ∫adt, and (e)da/dt?
66. Considertheequation4000/400=10.0.Assumingthe
numberofsignificantfiguresintheansweriscorrect,what
canyousayaboutthenumberofsignificantfiguresin4000
54. Suppose [V] = L3, [ρ]=ML–3 , and [t] = T. (a)
and 400?
What is the dimension of ∫ρdV? (b) What is the
67. Suppose your bathroom scale reads your mass as 65
dimension of dV/dt? (c) What is the dimension of
kg with a 3% uncertainty. What is the uncertainty in your
ρ(dV/dt)?
mass (in kilograms)?
55. The arc length formula says the length s of arc 68. Agood-qualitymeasuringtapecanbeoffby0.50cm
subtendedbyangle Ɵ inacircleofradius r isgivenby over a distance of 20 m. What is its percent uncertainty?
the equation s=r Ɵ. What are the dimensions of (a) s,
(b)r, and (c) Ɵ? 69. Aninfant’spulserateismeasuredtobe130±5beats/
min. What is the percent uncertainty in this measurement?
70. (a)Supposethatapersonhasanaverageheartrateof
1.5Estimates and Fermi Calculations
72.0beats/min.Howmanybeatsdoesheorshehavein2.0
56. Assumingthehumanbodyismadeprimarilyofwater, years? (b) In 2.00 years? (c) In 2.000 years?
estimate the volume of a person.
71. Acancontains375mLofsoda.Howmuchisleftafter
57. Assumingthehumanbodyisprimarilymadeofwater, 308 mL is removed?
estimatethenumberofmoleculesinit.(Notethatwaterhas
a molecular mass of 18 g/mol and there are roughly 1024
72. State how many significant figures are proper in the
atoms in a mole.)
results of the following calculations: (a)
(106.7)(98.2)/ (46.210)(1.01); (b) (18.7)2; (c)
58. Estimate the mass of air in a classroom.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement 41
⎛ −19⎞ ±0.5s,whatistheheartrateanditsuncertaintyinbeatsper
1.60×10 (3712)
⎝ ⎠
minute?
73. (a) How many significant figures are in the numbers 77. What is the area of a circle 3.102 cm in diameter?
99 and 100.? (b) If the uncertainty in each number is 1,
what is the percent uncertainty in each? (c) Which is a
78. Determine the number of significant figures in the
moremeaningfulwaytoexpresstheaccuracyofthesetwo
following measurements: (a) 0.0009, (b) 15,450.0, (c)
numbers: significant figures or percent uncertainties?
6×103, (d) 87.990, and (e) 30.42.
74. (a)Ifyourspeedometerhasanuncertaintyof2.0km/h
79. Perform the following calculations and express your
ataspeedof90km/h,whatisthepercentuncertainty?(b)
answer using the correct number of significant digits. (a)
Ifithasthesamepercentuncertaintywhenitreads60km/
A woman has two bags weighing 13.5 lb and one bag
h, what is the range of speeds you could be going?
with a weight of 10.2 lb. What is the total weight of the
bags? (b) The force F on an object is equal to its mass m
75. (a) A person’s blood pressure is measured to be multiplied by its acceleration a. If a wagon with mass 55
120±2mm Hg. What is its percent uncertainty? (b) kgacceleratesatarateof0.0255m/s2,whatistheforceon
Assuming the same percent uncertainty, what is the thewagon?(Theunitofforceiscalledthenewtonanditis
uncertainty in a blood pressure measurement of 80 mm expressed with the symbol N.)
Hg?
76. Apersonmeasureshisorherheartratebycountingthe
numberofbeatsin30s.If40±1beatsarecountedin30.0
ADDITIONAL PROBLEMS
80. Considertheequationy=mt+b,wherethedimension 84. Thesidesofasmallrectangular boxaremeasuredto
of y is length and the dimension of t is time, and m and b be 1.80 ± 0.1 cm, 2.05 ± 0.02 cm, and 3.1 ± 0.1 cm long.
areconstants.WhatarethedimensionsandSIunitsof(a) Calculate its volume and uncertainty in cubic centimeters.
mand (b)b?
85. When nonmetric units were used in the United
81. Consider the equation Kingdom,aunitofmasscalledthepound-mass(lbm)was
s=s +v t+a t2/2+ j t3 /6+S t4/24+ct5 /120, used,where1lbm=0.4539kg.(a)Ifthereisanuncertainty
0 0 0 0 0 of 0.0001 kg in the pound-mass unit, what is its percent
wheresisalengthandtisatime.Whatarethedimensions
uncertainty? (b) Based on that percent uncertainty, what
andSIunitsof(a) s 0, (b) v 0, (c) a 0, (d) j 0, (e) S 0, mass in pound-mass has an uncertainty of 1 kg when
and (f)c? converted to kilograms?
82. (a) A car speedometer has a 5% uncertainty. What is 86. The length and width of a rectangular room are
the range of possible speeds when it reads 90 km/h? (b) measured to be 3.955 ± 0.005 m and 3.050 ± 0.005 m.
Convert this range to miles per hour. Note 1 km = 0.6214 Calculatetheareaoftheroomanditsuncertaintyinsquare
mi. meters.
83. Amarathonrunnercompletesa42.188-kmcoursein2 87. A car engine moves a piston with a circular cross-
h,30min,and12s.Thereisanuncertaintyof25minthe section of 7.500 ± 0.002 cm in diameter a distance of
distance traveled and an uncertainty of 1 s in the elapsed 3.250 ± 0.001 cm to compress the gas in the cylinder. (a)
time. (a) Calculate the percent uncertainty in the distance. By what amount is the gas decreased in volume in cubic
(b)Calculatethepercentuncertaintyintheelapsedtime.(c) centimeters? (b) Find the uncertainty in this volume.
Whatistheaveragespeedinmeterspersecond?(d)What
is the uncertainty in the average speed?
CHALLENGE PROBLEMS
88. ThefirstatomicbombwasdetonatedonJuly16,1945, In1947,theU.S.governmentdeclassifiedafilmreelofthe
at the Trinity test site about 200 mi south of Los Alamos. explosion.Fromthisfilmreel,BritishphysicistG.I.Taylor42 Chapter 1 | Units and Measurement
was able to determine the rate at which the radius of the (that is, kt TNT). Compare your answer with the quick-
fireballfromtheblastgrew.Usingdimensionalanalysis,he and-dirtyestimateof10ktTNTmadebyphysicistEnrico
was then able to deduce the amount of energy released in Fermishortlyafterwitnessingtheexplosionfromwhatwas
the explosion, which was a closely guarded secret at the thoughttobeasafedistance.(Reportedly,Fermimadehis
time.Becauseofthis,Taylordidnotpublishhisresultsuntil estimate by dropping some shredded bits of paper right
1950.Thisproblemchallengesyoutorecreatethisfamous beforetheremnantsoftheshockwavehithimandlooked
calculation.(a)Usingkeenphysicalinsightdevelopedfrom to see how far they were carried by it.)
years of experience, Taylor decided the radius r of the
fireball should depend only on time since the explosion, 89. The purpose of this problem is to show the entire
t, the density of the air, ρ, and the energy of the initial concept of dimensional consistency can be summarized
explosion, E. Thus, he made the educated guess that by the old saying “You can’t add apples and oranges.” If
r =kEaρbtc forsomedimensionlessconstantkandsome you have studied power series expansions in a calculus
course,youknowthestandardmathematicalfunctionssuch
unknownexponentsa,b,andc.Giventhat[E]=ML2T–2,
as trigonometric functions, logarithms, and exponential
determine the values of the exponents necessary to make
functions can be expressed as infinite sums of the form
this equation dimensionally consistent. (Hint: Notice the
∞
equationimpliesthat k=rE−aρ−bt−c andthat [k]=1. ∑ a nxn =a 0+a 1x+a 2x2+a 3x3 + ⋯, where
n=0
) (b) By analyzing data from high-energy conventional
the a are dimensionless constants for all
explosives,Taylorfoundtheformulahederivedseemedto n
bevalidaslongastheconstantkhadthevalue1.03.From n=0, 1, 2, ⋯ and x is the argument of the function.
the film reel, he was able to determine many values of r (If you have not studied power series in calculus yet, just
and the corresponding values of t. For example, he found trust us.) Use this fact to explain why the requirement
that after 25.0 ms, the fireball had a radius of 130.0 m. that all terms in an equation have the same dimensions is
Usethesevalues,alongwithanaverageairdensityof1.25 sufficient as a definition of dimensional consistency. That
kg/m3, to calculate the initial energy release of the Trinity is, it actually implies the arguments of standard
detonation in joules (J). (Hint: To get energy in joules, mathematicalfunctionsmustbedimensionless,soitisnot
you need to make sure all the numbers you substitute in really necessary to make this latter condition a separate
are expressed in terms of SI base units.) (c) The energy requirementofthedefinitionofdimensionalconsistencyas
releasedinlargeexplosionsisoftencitedinunitsof“tons we have done in this section.
of TNT” (abbreviated “t TNT”), where 1 t TNT is about
4.2 GJ. Convert your answer to (b) into kilotons of TNT
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col12031/1.10